Title: Geometry-Consistent Endoscopic Representations for Image-Guided Navigation via Structured Foundation Model Adaptation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.17340v1

Published Time: Wed, 17 Jun 2026 00:21:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE 1

# Geometry-Consistent Endoscopic Representations for Image-Guided Navigation via Structured Foundation Model Adaptation 

Hongchao Shu, Roger D. Soberanis-Mukul, Hao Ding, Morgan Ringel, Mali Shen, Saif Iftekar Sayed, Hedyeh Rafii-Tari, Mathias Unberath Member, IEEE 

Abstract — Accurate vision-based navigation in monoc-ular endoscopy is difficult due to limited depth cues, weak tissue texture, non-rigid deformation, and substan-tial appearance variation across domains, all of which complicate pose estimation, depth prediction, and image-to-anatomy alignment. Although recent vision foundation models have shown promise, their learned representations often remain insufficiently geometry-consistent, hindering stable feature correspondence and limiting their reliability for downstream navigation tasks. We propose a unified framework for learning geometry-consistent and domain-robust image representations for monocular endoscopy. The framework combines a synthetic data pipeline that provides accurate geometric supervision with Hierarchy-Aware Geometry–Semantic Adaptation, a structured alter-native to standard LoRA that inserts low-rank adapters selectively across the transformer hierarchy and couples them with layer-wise training objectives to encourage ge-ometric correspondence in intermediate features and se-mantic consistency in deeper features. Experiments on public and proprietary datasets show improved geometric and semantic representation quality, leading to better per-formance on downstream navigation tasks including pose estimation and monocular depth estimation. The learned representations show favorable synthetic-to-real transfer on clinical bronchoscopy and provide a useful initialization for adaptation to sinus endoscopy and colonoscopy under limited supervision. The framework also shows favorable scaling with model size and training data. These results support hierarchy-aware, geometry-guided adaptation as a practical approach for endoscopic representation learning. 

Manuscript submitted 15 Apr 2026. This work is partially sponsored by Auris Health, Inc. part of Johnson & Johnson MedTech. Hongchao Shu and Roger D. Soberanis-Mukul are with the Depart-ment of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21211 USA. (email: hshu4@jhu.edu; rsobera1@jhu.edu) Hao Ding was with the Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21211 USA. He is now with the Semaphor Surgical (email: hao@semaphorsurgical.com). Morgan Ringel is now with Johnson & Johnson MedTech, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (email: mringel@its.jnj.com). Mali Shen is now with Johnson & Johnson MedTech, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (email: mshen2@its.jnj.com). Saif Iftekar Sayed is now with Johnson & Johnson MedTech, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (email: ssayed3@its.jnj.com). Hedyeh Rafii-Tari is now with Johnson & Johnson MedTech, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (email: hrafiida@its.jnj.com). Mathias Unberath is with the Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21211 USA. (email: un-berath@jhu.edu) 

Index Terms — surgical navigation, Endoscopic Localiza-tion, Vision Foundation Models, Representation Learning, Bronchoscopy 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# MINIMALLY invasive endoscopic procedures such as bronchoscopy, sinus surgery, and colonoscopy reduce patient trauma and recovery time by avoiding large incisions and enabling intervention through natural orifices or small access ports. Yet these benefits come with a core limitation: clinicians must navigate complex, branching anatomy using primarily a monocular 2D image stream with limited depth cues. This makes spatial reasoning difficult, increases cog-nitive load, and can lead to navigation uncertainty during image-guided tasks. These challenges have motivated growing interest in computer-assisted systems for navigation support and intra-procedural decision-making. Within such systems, AI is increasingly used to extract actionable information from endoscopic images and support downstream reasoning. Rep-resentation learning is particularly important in this context because it can transform raw endoscopic observations into features that better encode geometry, viewpoint, and anatom-ical context. Recent progress on world models and structured visual representation learning suggests that compact latent features can support robust downstream reasoning [1], [2]. In this work, we focus on one foundational component of that agenda for endoscopy: learning geometry-consistent image representations from individual frames. Learning geometry-consistent endoscopic representations from image frames is technically difficult. Endoscopic imagery is often texture-scarce and repetitive, contains strong specular highlights from fluids and tissue interfaces, and is affected by non-rigid deformation and instrument interaction. These factors break common assumptions behind geometric estima-tion and correspondence, making learned geometry unstable and difficult to generalize across patients, devices, and proce-dures [3]. The challenge is compounded by data constraints: large-scale labeled datasets are difficult to assemble due to privacy and policy restrictions, and the most informative su-pervision signals such as accurate camera pose, intraoperative 3D structure, or dense depth are impractical or impossible to obtain routinely in clinical settings. As a result, methods that rely heavily on precise geometric labels or dense annotations  

> arXiv:2606.17340v1 [cs.CV] 15 Jun 2026 2IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE

face significant barriers to scaling and broad deployment. In addition, achieving robust generalization across clinical environments remains a persistent challenge. Endoscopic data can vary significantly across devices, imaging modalities, and hospitals due to differences in camera optics, illumination settings, and procedural protocols, causing models trained in one setting to degrade when deployed in another. These combined factors make it difficult to learn representations that simultaneously capture reliable geometric structure, remain robust under domain shifts, and scale to real-world clinical data. Recent progress in vision foundation models has opened new opportunities for endoscopic imaging, including both adaptation of general-purpose visual backbones [4]–[7] and pretraining of endoscopy-specific models [8], [9]. Yet most existing methods are developed mainly for semantic perception and do not explicitly enforce geometric consistency in the learned representations. As a result, they remain less reliable for spatial reasoning tasks such as navigation, pose refinement, and depth understanding, where both geometric stability and cross-domain robustness are critical. In this study, we propose a unified framework for learning geometry-consistent and domain-invariant endoscopic repre-sentations from image frames. The framework is designed to tackle three key limitations simultaneously: the lack of reliable geometric supervision, the difficulty of adapting large vision foundation models to endoscopic scenes, and the need for representations that remain robust across domains. We con-struct a purpose-built synthetic dataset that provides accurate geometric signals while exposing the model to diverse render-ing conditions, enabling supervision that encourages domain-invariant geometric understanding without relying on scarce clinical annotations. We introduce Hierarchy-Aware Geome-try–Semantic Adaptation (HGSA), which selectively inserts low-rank adapters [10] into specific layers of a pretrained vision transformer. This structured placement is designed to better align adaptation with the transformer hierarchy, encour-aging a balance between mid-level geometric feature learning and higher-level semantic abstraction while preserving the general visual knowledge of the foundation model. We employ hierarchy-aware layer-wise objectives that combine feature-warping–based geometric supervision with global semantic alignment. By enforcing geometric correspondence at inter-mediate feature levels and semantic consistency at deeper layers, the framework encourages representations that maintain spatial structure while remaining robust across visual domains. Together, these components form an end-to-end pipeline for adapting a generic vision foundation model into a geometry-consistent representation that supports downstream image-guided navigation tasks in endoscopic environments. Through a set of experiments, we evaluate the representation quality, practical utility, and generalization of the proposed framework. Controlled studies first examine the effectiveness of the HGSA adaptation strategy through linear probing tasks that separately assess semantic and geometric representation quality, using scene classification and depth estimation as complementary indicators. The practical value of the learned representations is then validated in clinically relevant image-guided navigation settings, where improved geometric con-sistency leads to more stable pose optimization and depth prediction. The robustness and scalability of the framework are evaluated through synthetic-to-real transfer on bronchoscopy data, where the encoder is trained solely on synthetic data but applied to real patient videos. We further investigate cross-domain transfer by adapting the bronchoscopy-trained encoder to sinus and colonoscopy datasets under limited target-domain supervision, while also analyzing performance trends across larger backbone models and increasing training data. The contribution of this work lies in the following perspec-tives:  

> •

We introduce a unified pipeline that integrates a purpose-built dataset, the HGSA mechanism and hierarchy-aware, layer-wise objectives that jointly enforce geometric con-sistency and semantic robustness to learn endoscopic representations.  

> •

We show through controlled experiments that HGSA is an effective adaptation strategy for improving representation quality, and that the resulting representations remain use-ful across domains while supporting downstream image-guided navigation tasks including pose estimation and depth estimation.  

> •

We demonstrate strong sim-to-real generalization, where representations trained on synthetic bronchoscopy data transfer effectively to real patient videos, and further study cross-domain transfer to sinus and colonoscopy datasets under limited supervision, together with scala-bility analyses across larger transformer backbones and increasing training data. 

II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Vision Foundation Models for Endoscopic Imaging 

Foundation models (FMs) are increasingly used in medical imaging because large-scale self-supervised pre-training can reduce reliance on densely annotated datasets [11]. In en-doscopy, early work mainly adapted general vision foundation models such as DINO [4] and SAM [5] through zero-shot transfer or parameter-efficient tuning. Representative examples include SAM-based medical adaptations [6], [7], [12]–[14] and adapter-based methods such as ST-Adapter [15]. Although these approaches improve transfer with limited trainable pa-rameters, they remain constrained by the domain gap between natural images and endoscopic data, often lacking robustness to low-contrast tissue appearance and complex procedural dynamics [6]. 

B. Domain-Specific Endoscopic Foundation Models 

To better address this gap, several works have developed endoscopy-specific foundation models trained directly on large surgical datasets. Examples include image-based models such as EndoViT [8] and EndoDINO [9], as well as video-oriented models such as Endo-FM [16] and EndoMamba [17]. These models capture endoscopic appearance and motion more ef-fectively than general-purpose backbones, but require large curated datasets and still remain sensitive to cross-domain AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 3Fig. 2 overview of the framework  

> RGB image
> CT mesh
> Renderer
> xy
> z

Init pose 

CT mesh 

> Randomizations
> Multi -domain augmented database
> Layer 1
> Layer 2
> Layer 3
> Layer N

## … 

> Hierarchy -aware adaptation

Adapters …     

> CT Mesh
> Poses
> RGB Image
> Initial Depth
> Encoder Depth
> Decoder
> Encoder
> Feats 1
> Feats 2
> Pose
> Decoder
> RGB Image xy
> z
> Init pose
> CT mesh
> Navigation applications
> Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed framework. The figure shows an example instantiation in bronchoscopy. Synthetic 3D anatomical models are rendered under sampled camera poses and augmented to form a multi-domain training set. The HGSA inserts lightweight adapters into selected transformer layers to learn geometry-consistent and domain-robust representations, which are then used in downstream navigation-related tasks such as depth estimation and pose optimization.

variation such as differences in hardware, illumination, and procedure type. Moreover, they do not explicitly enforce 3D geometric consistency [9]. 

C. Domain-Invariant and Geometry-Aware Representation Learning 

Robust endoscopic representations should ideally be both domain-invariant and geometry-consistent, yet existing work often addresses these goals separately. Domain generaliza-tion methods, including adversarial feature alignment [18], federated optimization [19], and simulation-based appearance diversification through realistic rendering and domain random-ization [20], [21], mainly improve robustness to visual appear-ance shifts without explicitly enforcing 3D spatial structure. Conversely, geometry-focused approaches, such as Surgical-DINO [22] and foundation-model-based methods combined with NeRF, improve depth or multi-view consistency but are often more vulnerable to real clinical appearance shifts [23]. More recent work has begun to connect these directions. For example, BronchOpt [24] uses a fine-tuned foundation model within an iterative pose optimization framework for bronchoscopy navigation. In contrast, our work focuses on learning geometry-consistent and domain-robust representa-tions directly through structured adaptation and synthetic ge-ometric supervision. 

III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Framework Overview 

Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed framework, which consists of three stages. A multi-domain augmented training database (Sec. III-E) is constructed by rendering paired endoscopic views from anatomical 3D models under sampled camera poses, together with appearance augmentation that increases visual diversity while preserving geometric consistency. These training pairs are then used to adapt a pretrained vision trans-former through the proposed Hierarchy-Aware Geometry– Semantic Adaptation (HGSA) module (Sec. III-C), which selectively inserts low-rank adapters into layers of the back-bone and applies layer-wise supervision (Sec. III-D) to en-courage geometric correspondence in intermediate features and semantic consistency in deeper features. The adapted encoder is finally evaluated in downstream navigation-related tasks (Sec. III-F), including monocular depth estimation and endoscope pose estimation, to assess the utility of the learned representation. The following subsections describe each component in detail. 

B. Latent Representation Modeling of the Endoscopic Environment 

We seek to learn a visual representation that captures the structural properties of the endoscopic scene from individual image frames. Given an input image I ∈ RH×W ×3, a vision foundation model fθ (·) produces a latent feature map 

z = fθ (I), z ∈ RN ×C , (1) where N is the number of spatial tokens and C is the feature dimension. The desired representation should preserve scene geometry, remain robust across imaging domains, and maintain semantic separability. Geometric consistency requires that spatial relationships between regions are preserved in the latent space. For two tokens zi and zj , their similarity is defined as 

sij = z⊤ 

> i

zj

∥zi∥∥ zj ∥ , (2) which should remain stable for regions corresponding to the same underlying anatomical structure. Domain invariance requires the representation to generalize across imaging conditions. Let Is ∼ D s and Ir ∼ D r denote synthetic and real clinical images, respectively. For structurally similar scenes, the representation should remain consistent across domains: 

fθ (Is) ≈ fθ (Ir ). (3) Semantic discriminability requires features from different anatomical categories to remain separable in the latent space. 

C. Hierarchy-aware Geometry-Semantic Adaptation 

Vision foundation models pretrained on large-scale natural image datasets provide strong general-purpose visual represen-tations, but their internal feature hierarchy is not optimized for the geometric reasoning required in endoscopic environments. In particular, different transformer layers capture different 4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE 

levels of abstraction: intermediate layers typically encode spa-tial structures and local correspondences, while deeper layers capture higher-level semantic context. This observation moti-vates a hierarchy-aware adaptation strategy, where parameter-efficient adapters are inserted at selected transformer layers to better align adaptation with the geometric and semantic roles of different transformer stages. Let fθ0 denote a pretrained vision transformer with L layers. HGSA adapts the model by inserting lightweight adapters into a subset of layers La ⊂ { 1, . . . , L }, producing an adapted encoder z = fθ0,ϕ (I) where ϕ denotes the trainable adapter parameters. Rather than uniformly adapting all layers, HGSA determines the adapter configuration through a coarse-to-fine hierarchical search over the design space 

C = {(La, r, α, M )} (4) where La denotes adapter layer placement, r the adapter rank, α the scaling factor, and M the targeted attention projection modules. Exhaustively exploring this space would be computationally prohibitive, therefore HGSA adopts ahierarchical coarse-to-fine search strategy that progressively refines the configuration space. The search prioritizes factors with larger influence on representation behavior, beginning with adapter placement, followed by projection targets, and finally adapter capacity parameters. The search proceeds in three stages while retaining only the strongest candidates at each step. First, adapter insertion patterns along the trans-former hierarchy are explored to determine the most effec-tive layer subset La. Guided by the hierarchical nature of transformer representations [25], [26], candidate placements include early, middle, late, and several late-layer combinations. Next, HGSA evaluates different attention projection targets 

M , inserting adapters into combined projections including V ,

QV , QV K , and QV KO . Finally, the search refines adapter capacity through rank–scaling parameterization, evaluating rank–scaling pairs (r, α ), configurations commonly used to maintain stable adaptation strength [10], [27]. Each candidate configuration c ∈ C defines an adapted encoder f (c)

> θ0,ϕ

, which is evaluated using linear probing on two complementary tasks reflecting semantic and geometric representation quality. 

D. Geometry and Semantic-aware Supervision 

To learn representations that preserve spatial structure while maintaining semantic robustness, we design a supervision framework that jointly enforces geometry-aware local cor-respondence and semantic-level instance consistency. The supervision operates on two complementary representations extracted from the encoder: spatial tokens that retain spatial detail and global tokens that summarize scene-level semantics. 

1) Geometry-aware Feature Correspondence: Given two images Ia and Ib observing the same scene from different viewpoints, the encoder produces spatial token features za =

fθ (Ia), zb = fθ (Ib), where za, z b ∈ RN ×C . Using rendered depth and relative camera pose, we compute dense pixel correspondences between the two views, resulting in a Teacher      

> Augmented scene A
> Patch sample
> Projection
> Projection
> ℒ!"
> ℒ#$%&'()
> 𝐹 !
> 𝐹 "
> ℒ*+,!
> 𝐵 #𝐵 "𝐵 !
> 𝐵 #𝐵 "𝐵 !
> Augmented scene B
> 𝑊
> Backbone
> Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed geometry–semantic representation learning pipeline. Synthetic endoscopic images with known geometry are used to supervise representation learning. Disparity (or depth) is estimated from real images, while rendered depth from synthetic views provides geometric grounding. The encoder is trained to align features across domains under geometric constraints, encouraging both domain invariance and correspondence consistency.

ground-truth flow field Fb→a. The feature map of view Ib is then warped into the coordinate frame of Ia:

˜zb = W(zb, F b→a) (5) where W(·) denotes a differentiable feature warping operator. A valid overlap mask M identifies spatial regions visible in both views. Geometry-aware supervision is applied through a multi-scale dense token loss 

Lms = X

> l∈L

wmask 



L(l) 

> PatchNCE

+ L(l)

> cos



(6) where wmask denotes the valid patch mask weights derived from geometric visibility, LPatchNCE is the patch-level con-trastive loss [28] on geometry-aligned tokens, and Lcos is the cosine reprojection loss between warped and reference features. This loss is applied to mid-level transformer features, where spatial structure is most strongly preserved. 

2) Semantic-aware Representation Regularization: While spatial tokens capture local spatial structure, we also construct global tokens that summarize the entire frame. These are obtained by masked pooling of dense features followed by projection heads, producing compact view-level embeddings 

ga = h(za), gb = h(zb). Unlike the spatial tokens, these global representations capture scene-level semantics rather than spatial detail. Semantic consistency is enforced using an instance-level contrastive objective LInfoNCE [29], which aligns global features extracted from paired views. Only view pairs with valid geometric overlap contribute to the loss. This encourages different observations of the same scene to pro-duce similar global representations while separating unrelated scenes. In the transformer hierarchy, this loss is applied to late-layer features, where semantic abstraction is strongest. 

3) Semantic Structure Preservation via Teacher Distillation: 

During training, strong global contrastive supervision may encourage the model to focus excessively on scene-level semantics, potentially degrading the spatial fidelity of patch representations. To prevent this effect, we incorporate a Gram-based feature regularization LGram [30] using a frozen DINO teacher model [4]. This loss matches the correlation structure of student and teacher patch features across selected layers. By preserving the relational structure among patch embeddings, AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 5

this regularization helps maintain spatial resolution in the learned representation while allowing semantic adaptation. The final training objective combines geometry-aware dense supervision with semantic-level regularization: 

L = λms Lms + λnce LInfoNCE + λgram Lgram (7) where the weighting coefficients λms , λnce , and λgram bal-ance the contributions of the three supervision signals. 

E. Physically Grounded Dataset with Multi-Level Domain Randomization 

To provide reliable geometric supervision without relying on clinical annotations, we construct a geometry-supervised synthetic dataset with domain randomization. The dataset is generated from CT-derived anatomical models by rendering virtual endoscopic views along sampled camera trajectories. For each pose, RGB images and depth maps are rendered. To increase appearance diversity, rendered RGB images are trans-lated to realistic using trained CycleGAN [31]. In addition, dis-parity predictions generated by an off-the-shelf network [32] are included as an alternative modality. Overall there are 4 different image modalities. During training, input modality randomization is applied for each view. The encoder input is randomly selected from all modalities. Additional augmentations are applied to both RGB and depth inputs. RGB images undergo photometric transformations, blur and noise perturbations, thin-plate spline deformation, and coarse dropout. Depth maps are augmented with scale perturbations, depth-to-disparity conversion, blur, noise, and dropout. Training also includes pair-level random-ization, where image pairs are sampled from precomputed cross-view relationships and reshuffled each epoch. For ge-ometry supervision, valid patch correspondences are randomly sampled from overlapping regions between paired views. 

F. Applications to Image-guided Navigation 

we apply the trained encoder to two core tasks in image-guided surgical navigation: vision-based endoscope pose estimation ˆT = hpose (z, I ), ˆT ∈ SE (3) where T denotes the 6-DoF camera pose. And monocular endoscope depth es-timation ˆD = hdepth (z), ˆD ∈ RH×W , where D denotes the depth map. These tasks capture two fundamental components of intraoperative spatial understanding. In both applications, the encoder trained with the proposed framework is kept frozen and used purely as a feature extrac-tor. 

IV. E XPERIMENTS SETTINGS 

A. Dataset 

We study three endoscopic modalities: bronchoscopy, sinus endoscopy, and colonoscopy. All datasets consist of monocular endoscopic video frames and are preprocessed using a shared protocol, including center-cropping and resizing to 200 × 200 .Synthetic training pairs are generated from 3D anatomy by rendering paired endoscopic views under sampled camera poses, followed by modality-specific appearance translation using separately trained CycleGAN models [31]. The bron-choscopy synthetic training set used for the main representa-tion learning stage contains 481 ,650 image pairs. For cross-procedure transfer, the sinus and colonoscopy synthetic train-ing sets used for few-shot target-domain fine-tuning contain 

8,944 and 18 ,832 image pairs, respectively. For evaluation, the real bronchoscopy dataset contains 

8 clinical procedures and 20 ,555 frames, but no frame-wise aligned 6-DoF bronchoscope poses, so evaluation re-lies on alignment-based proxy metrics. The sinus dataset contains 4 sequences and 1,107 frames with 6-DoF poses. For colonoscopy, we use a matched subset of the C3VD dataset [33] consisting of 4 sequences and 1,176 frames with 6-DoF poses. Additional dataset construction and split details are provided in the supplementary material. 

B. Representation Probing 

We evaluate representation quality using linear probing on two complementary tasks measuring semantic and geometric properties. For both tasks, we use cross-fold evaluation split by patient case to prevent leakage between training and vali-dation sets. For semantic probing, we train a linear classifier on frozen encoder features to perform scene classification over seven anatomical landmark categories. Performance is measured using Accuracy (Acc) and F1-score (F1). For geo-metric probing, monocular depth estimation is performed by training a lightweight depth prediction head on frozen encoder features. Performance is evaluated using AbsRel, LogRMSE, and δ1 [34]. To compare encoder configurations, we compute a combined score 

Sprobe = λ1Sgeo + λ2Ssem (8) where Sgeo = e−AbsRel + e−LogRMSE + δ1, Ssem = Acc + F1. 

λ1 and λ2 balance contributions of geometric and semantic evaluation. 

C. Navigation Task Evaluation 

We evaluate the learned representations through two down-stream navigation-related tasks: vision-based endoscope pose estimation and monocular endoscope depth estimation. In both applications, the encoder is kept frozen and used purely as a feature extractor within established downstream pipelines, allowing the effect of representation quality to be assessed independently of task-specific architecture changes. We intentionally adopt established downstream architectures to isolate the contribution of the learned representation and avoid conflating encoder improvements with changes in task-specific network design.  

> 1) Endoscope pose estimation:

Pose estimation follows the framework design of BronchOpt [24], where the frozen en-coder provides visual features for pose regression. Perfor-mance is evaluated using the combined pose error consisting of L2 translation distance and geodesic rotation distance Lgeo .In addition, we employ image similarity–based metrics [24] as proxy measures of pose accuracy by evaluating the align-ment between rendered and observed views. Specifically, we compute Normalized Correlation (NC), Depth Similarity (DS), 6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE 

and Scale-Invariant Structural Alignment (SI) [34], where higher similarity indicates better geometric alignment under the estimated pose.  

> 2) Monocular depth estimation:

Depth estimation follows the network design of DPT [35], where a lightweight decoder predicts dense depth maps from encoder features. Performance is evaluated using standard metrics including AbsRel, Lo-gRMSE, and δ1.Cross-domain evaluation on the sinus endoscopy and colonoscopy datasets is performed by retraining only the task-specific heads using a small amount of target-domain data while keeping the encoder frozen. Benchmark comparisons are conducted against alternative pretrained backbones under the same protocol. 

V. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

This section presents experimental results and analysis of the proposed framework. We first evaluate the HGSA strat-egy through controlled ablation studies to understand how adapter placement and configuration influence representation quality. We then analyze the learned representations to assess domain alignment and geometric consistency, providing both qualitative and quantitative evidence of domain-invariant and geometry-preserving behavior. We evaluate the practical ef-fectiveness of the learned representations in clinically relevant image-guided navigation tasks, including endoscope pose es-timation and monocular depth estimation, and examine cross-domain generalization to other endoscopic procedures. 

A. HGSA Configuration Study 

The results of the hierarchical adaptation search are sum-marized in Table I. The search is performed progressively over three dimensions. We first search LoRA layer placement along the transformer hierarchy and retain the top three configurations according to the combined probing score Sprobe .For clarity, Table I reports, at each stage, the top three configurations together with the full set of results from one representative branch to show the trend within that search dimension (e.g., Cfgs. 7.1–7.4 in Stage 2). We then eval-uate attention-module targets within the retained placement branches and subsequently refine LoRA rank and scaling based on the top Stage 2 configurations. The final selected model is used in subsequent experiments, and the full set of evaluated configurations ( 41 in total) is provided in the supplementary material. Several patterns observed in this search are consistent with prior findings on transformer representations and parameter-efficient adaptation (Fig. 4). First, performance is sensitive to adapter placement, reflecting the hierarchical structure of transformer features. Prior work has shown that intermedi-ate layers tend to preserve more spatial structure, whereas deeper layers encode increasingly semantic information [26]. Consistent with this view, the strongest probing results are obtained when adaptation extends beyond the earliest trans-former layers. Second, the rank search shows that increasing adapter rank improves performance up to a relatively stable regime. This trend agrees with prior studies on LoRA and related parameter-efficient tuning methods, which show that higher ranks increase adaptation capacity but eventually reach diminishing returns [10], [27]. Beyond these expected trends, the search also reveals ob-servations that are particularly relevant to endoscopic repre-sentation learning. The probing results suggest a geometry– semantic trade-off: some configurations (e.g., Cfg 8) improve semantic separability while weakening geometric consistency, whereas others (e.g., Cfg 2) favor geometric accuracy at the cost of semantic discrimination. Within this trade-off, the HGSA search provides a practical way to identify configura-tions that perform well on both criteria. The module search further shows that adapting multiple attention projections jointly yields stronger representations than modifying individ-ual projections in isolation, suggesting that geometry-aware correspondence learning benefits from coordinated adaptation across attention pathways. Moreover, although full-hierarchy adaptation achieves the highest score during the placement search, the final best configuration emerges from Cfg 7 (layers 5–12) after module and rank refinement. This indicates that effective adaptation is not determined by placement alone, but by the interaction among layer selection, target modules, and adaptation capacity. Although these results support the usefulness of hierarchy-aware adaptation, they do not by themselves fully disentangle the effect of adapter placement from the broader training recipe. We therefore interpret HGSA primarily as an empiri-cally effective configuration strategy rather than as a uniquely identified mechanism. 

B. Component Ablation Study 

To assess the contribution of each component, we perform controlled ablations by removing one module at a time from the full model while keeping all other training settings un-changed. Representation quality is evaluated using the same probing tasks described in Sec. IV-B, and the results are summarized in Table II. Removing HGSA lowers both se-mantic and geometric scores, indicating that hierarchy-aware configuration improves the joint quality of the learned repre-sentation. Among the loss terms, removing LInfoNCE causes the largest drop, especially in semantic performance, suggesting that contrastive alignment is the main driver of semantic separability. Removing Lms produces a smaller but consistent degradation, particularly in the geometric score, indicating that multi-scale geometric supervision provides complementary support for spatial correspondence. Removing LGram leads to a modest decline, suggesting an additional but non-dominant regularization benefit. Performance also decreases when warp supervision is removed, showing that explicit correspondence learning through geometric warping contributes beyond global contrastive supervision alone. Overall, the full model performs best across all three probing metrics, indicating that HGSA, contrastive alignment, geometric supervision, warp-based cor-respondence learning, and regularization act as complementary components of the final representation-learning framework. AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 7Fig. 8 qualitative results 

# Pose estimation 

Init DINO Ours 

> Sinus  Colon  Airway

(a) (b) Init DINO Ours  

> Sinus  Colon  Airway
> GT/ pseudo GT

DAv2 DINO Ours Far 

> Near

Fig. 3. Qualitative results for the navigation tasks.(a) Pose estimation visualization across airway, colon, and sinus domains. Rendered depth contours are overlaid on input images for the initial pose (Init). Init shows the alignment before optimization, while DINO [30] and Ours use the same optimization pipeline with different encoders under same training protocol. The proposed method achieves better alignment with anatomical structures. (b) Cross-domain depth estimation. From left to right: input, ground truth (pseudo GT for Airway), DAv2 [36], DINO [30], and Ours. The proposed method produces more accurate and structurally consistent depth predictions. TABLE I PROGRESSIVE HGSA CONFIGURATION SEARCH OVER LAYER PLACEMENT , ATTENTION -MODULE SELECTION , AND LORA RANK /SCALE .PERFORMANCE IS MEASURED BY THE SEMANTIC SCORE Ssem , GEOMETRIC SCORE Sgeo , AND THEIR COMBINED PROBING SCORE SPROBE .WITHIN EACH STAGE , THE BEST , SECOND -BEST , AND THIRD -BEST CONFIGURATIONS ARE HIGHLIGHTED WITH DECREASING GREEN INTENSITY . T HE FINAL CONFIGURATION (C FG 7.4.8) IS USED IN SUBSEQUENT EXPERIMENTS .

Stage 1: Layer Placement Search Stage 2: Target Module Search Stage 3: LoRA Rank & Scale Search Cfg Layers Ssem Sgeo Sprobe Cfg Modules Ssem Sgeo Sprobe Cfg (r, α ) Ssem Sgeo Sprobe 

DINO w/o LoRA 0.805 0.456 1.261 7.1 V 0.685 0.519 1.204 7.4.1 (4,4) 0.745 0.529 1.274 1 1–4 0.525 0.514 1.039 7.2 QV 0.765 0.544 1.309 7.4.2 (4,8) 0.770 0.523 1.293 2 5–8 0.690 0.562 1.252 7.3 QVK 0.760 0.563 1.323 7.4.3 (8,8) 0.785 0.551 1.336 3 9–12 0.640 0.457 1.097 7.4 QVKO 0.830 0.576 1.406 7.4.4 (8,16) 0.820 0.579 1.399 4 8–12 0.520 0.481 1.001 2.4 QVKO 0.735 0.624 1.359 7.4.5 (16,16) 0.830 0.576 1.406 5 7–12 0.665 0.505 1.170 8.4 QVKO 0.785 0.550 1.335 7.4.6 (16,32) 0.820 0.583 1.403 6 6–12 0.675 0.517 1.192 7.4.7 (32,32) 0.830 0.576 1.406 7 5–12 0.680 0.519 1.199 7.4.8 (32,64) 0.850 0.592 1.442 8 Full LoRA 0.735 0.547 1.282 

TABLE II ABLATION STUDY OF THE PROPOSED REPRESENTATION LEARNING FRAMEWORK . P ERFORMANCE IS EVALUATED USING METRICS DEFINED IN SEC . IV-B. 

Variant Ssem Sgeo S

w/o HGSA 0.79 0.52 1.31 w/o Warp 0.74 0.52 1.26 w/o Lms 0.85 0.61 1.46 w/o LInf oN CE 0.63 0.56 1.19 w/o LGram 0.88 0.60 1.48 

Full model 0.91 0.64 1.55 

C. Geometry–Semantic Representation Analysis 

This subsection examines how the proposed framework influences the learned feature representation, focusing on two essential properties for image-guided navigation: domain invariance and geometric correspondence preservation. To evaluate domain invariance, we visualize feature embed-dings of real RGB, synthetic RGB, and depth images using t-SNE (Fig. 5 (a)). The pretrained encoder [30] produces clearly separated clusters across modalities, reflecting a strong domain gap. In contrast, the proposed method aligns features from 

TABLE III TOKEN -LEVEL GEOMETRIC CORRESPONDENCE EVALUATION 

Model PCK@1 ↑ PCK@3 ↑ L2 Error ↓ Cosine ↑

DINO (Vanilla) 0.085 0.440 3.678 0.480 DINO (Full LoRA) 0.181 0.565 2.940 0.522 

Ours 0.193 0.567 2.921 0.571 

different domains into a unified embedding space, indicating reduced domain bias while preserving meaningful structure. To assess geometric correspondence, we analyze feature consistency under known geometric transformations. Given paired bronchoscopy views with ground-truth relative poses, features from one view are warped to the other using the induced flow derived from rendered depth and camera ge-ometry. Correspondence quality is then evaluated by nearest-neighbor matching under ground-truth alignment, using token-level metrics including PCK@1, PCK@3, mean token-space error, and cosine similarity. As shown in Table III, standard LoRA adaptation already improves correspondence quality over the frozen DINO encoder across all metrics. The proposed method provides further gains beyond this non-hierarchy-aware LoRA baseline, with modest improvements in PCK and 8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE Fig. 5 HGSA behavior                            

> LoRA Placement Search (Insertion layers & 𝑆 !"#$% )
> 1-45-89-12 8-12 7-12 6-12 5-12 all
> Module Search (Modules & 𝑆 !"#$% )
> 1.30
> 1.25
> 1.20
> 1.15
> 1.10
> 1.05
> 1.00
> VQV QVK QVKO
> 1.20
> 1.25
> 1.30
> 1.35
> 1.40
> Rank & Scale Search ( rank, 𝛼 &𝑆 !"#$% )
> 4,44,8 8,8 8,16 16,16 16,32 32,32 32,64
> 1.25
> 1.30
> 1.35
> 1.40
> 1.45

Fig. 4. HGSA behavior across design stages. Top: adapter placement across transformer layers. Middle: attention module selection. Bottom: rank–scale analysis. Scores correspond to Sprobe . While early config-urations show non-monotonic behavior, progressively structured HGSA design leads to stable and consistent performance gains, highlighting the importance of hierarchy-aware adaptation. 

mean correspondence error and a larger increase in cosine similarity. These results suggest that HGSA improves feature consistency for geometry-aware matching beyond generic do-main adaptation alone. Qualitative examples are shown in Fig. 5(b). The pretrained features exhibit more diffuse and less structured responses, whereas the proposed representation produces smoother and more spatially coherent feature maps, further supporting its improved geometric consistency. Together, these analyses demonstrate that the learned repre-sentation simultaneously achieves domain alignment and geo-metric consistency. Such properties are particularly important in endoscopic environments, where visual appearance varies across procedures while reliable geometric cues remain critical for navigation and spatial reasoning. 

D. Sim-to-Real Generalization on Bronchoscopy via Pose Estimation 

We evaluate the sim-to-real transfer capability of the learned representation by applying the encoder trained on synthetic bronchoscopy data to real clinical bronchoscopy videos. Since dense ground-truth pose annotations are unavailable for real procedures, pose accuracy is assessed through render-ing–image alignment quality, where the estimated pose is used DINO Ours 

DINO Ours DINO Ours 

## (a) 

## (b)   

> Real RGB synthetic RGB Depth

Fig. 5. (a) t-SNE visualization of feature embeddings from real RGB, synthetic RGB, and depth images. The pretrained DINO encoder pro-duces domain-separated clusters, while the proposed method aligns features from different modalities into a unified space, indicating im-proved domain invariance. (b) Feature map visualization across views. Compared to DINO, the proposed representation exhibits smoother and more spatially consistent responses, reflecting improved geometric correspondence and structural awareness. 

to render views from the airway model and compared with the observed endoscopic images. Table.IV (airway) shows that the proposed representation consistently achieves stronger rendering–image alignment than the pretrained baseline [30] under the same pose optimiza-tion pipeline. Because frame-wise ground-truth bronchoscope poses are unavailable in real clinical videos, we interpret these improvements as evidence of better alignment quality rather than as direct proof of absolute pose accuracy. Nevertheless, the results suggest that the learned representation provides more reliable geometric correspondence between real endo-scopic images and rendered airway views. Qualitative results in Fig. 3(a) further show that the rendered contours from the estimated poses align more closely with anatomical structures, particularly along airway boundaries and bifurcations. In addition, Fig. 3(b) demonstrates that the learned representation produces depth predictions that are more coherent and structurally consistent with the ob-served anatomy. Taken together, these results suggest that the geometry-aware representation learned from synthetic data transfers favorably to real clinical bronchoscopy videos, im-proving rendering–image consistency under a fixed down-stream optimization pipeline without additional encoder adap-tation. AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 9                                                                                                  

> TABLE IV POSE ESTIMATION RESULTS ACROSS SIM -TO -REAL BRONCHOSCOPY AND CROSS -DOMAIN TRANSFER . A LL METHODS USE THE SAME POSE OPTIMIZATION PIPELINE AND DIFFER ONLY IN THE VISUAL ENCODER .
> Domain Model NC ↑DS ↑SI ↓t(mm) ↓r(rad) ↓
> Airway DINO (Vanilla) 0.591 0.768 0.737 ––DINO (Full LoRA) 0.612 0.644 0.420 ––
> Ours 0.680 0.866 0.184 ––Sinus DINO (Vanilla) 0.480 0.735 1.330 7.100 0.110 DINO (Full LoRA) 0.535 0.775 0.810 5.500 0.126
> Ours 0.625 0.855 0.300 3.500 0.097
> Colon DINO (Vanilla) 0.688 0.935 0.063 4.300 0.142 DINO (Full LoRA) 0.701 0.934 0.057 3.900 0.121
> Ours 0.723 0.955 0.045 3.500 0.113
> TABLE V CROSS -DOMAIN MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION UNDER LIMITED SUPERVISION . DA V2 [36] IS EVALUATED OUT -OF -THE -BOX ,WHILE
> DINO AND OURS ARE ADAPTED UNDER THE SAME TRAINING PROTOCOL .
> Domain Model AbsRel ↓RMSE ↓LogRMSE ↓δ1↑
> Sinus DAv2 (ViT-S) 0.547 0.170 0.485 0.358 DINO (Vanilla) 0.628 0.263 0.697 0.216 DINO (Full LoRA) 0.461 0.169 0.491 0.403
> Ours 0.359 0.148 0.407 0.497
> Colon DAv2 (ViT-S) 0.317 0.131 0.420 0.384 DINO (Vanilla) 0.562 0.209 0.595 0.312 DINO (Full LoRA) 0.086 0.054 0.116 0.948
> Ours 0.078 0.050 0.105 0.962

E. Cross-Domain Transfer to Sinus and Colonoscopy 

To further evaluate transferability beyond bronchoscopy, we examine adaptation of the learned representation to sinus en-doscopy and colonoscopy datasets under limited target-domain supervision. These procedures differ substantially from bron-choscopy in anatomical structure, imaging appearance, and scene geometry, providing a challenging test of whether the learned features capture transferable visual and geometric cues. We initialize the encoder with the bronchoscopy-trained representation and adapt it to each target domain using limited supervision. Quantitative results for pose estimation and depth prediction are reported in Table IV and Table V. The proposed representation consistently improves depth estimation across both domains, with substantial gains in all metrics compared to the vanilla pretrained encoder. For pose estimation, clear improvements are observed on the colon dataset across all metrics, while on the sinus dataset the improvements are less pronounced. This reduced gain on sinus can be attributed to the lim-ited amount of sinus data available during adaptation, which constrains the model’s ability to capture the high variability in texture, color, and anatomical conditions across patients. As a result, the learned representation provides a weaker prior under such limited supervision. This observation suggests that, while the proposed framework captures transferable geometric structure, additional data or more targeted adaptation may be beneficial for improving performance in this domain.                             

> TABLE VI SCALABILITY OF THE PROPOSED REPRESENTATION WITH RESPECT TO MODEL CAPACITY AND DATA SIZE .
> Setting Backbone Data Ssem Sgeo Sprobe
> Backbone Scaling ViT-L 100% 0.970 0.737 1.707
> ViT-B 100% 0.970 0.686 1.656 Base ViT-S 100% 0.970 0.644 1.614 Data Scaling ViT-S 50% 0.950 0.638 1.588 ViT-S 25% 0.940 0.616 1.556

These results suggest that the proposed framework learns geometry-aware representations that provide a useful initial-ization for adaptation across endoscopic procedures. Although performance varies by target domain and available supervision, the learned features remain beneficial for downstream pose and depth tasks, indicating that they capture structural cues that transfer beyond bronchoscopy. We note that these experiments evaluate transfer under limited target-domain adaptation rather than zero-shot gener-alization, and the available sinus and colonoscopy datasets are relatively small; accordingly, we interpret the results as evi-dence of promising transferability rather than broad procedure-invariant robustness. 

F. Scalability with Backbone Capacity and Training Data 

We evaluate the scalability of the proposed framework along two dimensions: backbone capacity and training data size (Table VI). 

1) Backbone scaling: We instantiate the encoder using ViT-S, ViT-B, and ViT-L backbones under the same training pro-tocol, with a fixed projection dimension for fair comparison. For deeper models, HGSA is applied to corresponding relative depth ranges to preserve the hierarchy of geometric and semantic adaptation. Results show consistent improvements with increasing model capacity, indicating that the proposed framework effectively leverages larger backbones to learn stronger representations. 

2) Data scaling: With a fixed backbone, we train using increasing subsets of the synthetic dataset ( 25% ,50% ,100% ). Performance improves steadily with more data, suggesting that the framework benefits from additional supervision without early saturation. Overall, these experiments demonstrate that the proposed framework exhibits strong scalability with respect to both model capacity and training data, supporting its applicability to larger foundation models and future large-scale endoscopic datasets. 

VI. C ONCLUSION 

We propose a unified framework for learning geometry-consistent and domain-invariant representations for endoscopic imaging by combining synthetic data with the HGSA adap-tation strategy and hierarchy-aware objectives. The learned representations improve both semantic and geometric feature quality, leading to better performance in image-guided navi-gation tasks such as pose estimation and depth prediction. Our 10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE 

approach demonstrates strong sim-to-real transfer on bron-choscopy and effective cross-domain adaptation to sinus and colonoscopy under limited supervision. These results suggest that the proposed framework provides a scalable and practical pathway toward robust endoscopic representation learning. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work is partially sponsored by Auris Health, Inc. part of Johnson & Johnson MedTech. 

REFERENCES 

[1] D. Ha and J. Schmidhuber, “World models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , vol. 2, no. 3, p. 440, 2018. [2] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to control: Learn-ing behaviors by latent imagination,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603 ,2019. [3] L. Maier-Hein, P. Mountney, A. Bartoli, H. Elhawary, D. Elson, A. Groch, A. Kolb, M. Rodrigues, J. Sorger, S. Speidel et al. , “Optical techniques for 3d surface reconstruction in computer-assisted laparo-scopic surgery,” Medical image analysis , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 974–996, 2013. [4] M. Oquab, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, H. Vo, M. Szafraniec, V. Khalidov, P. Fernandez, D. Haziza, F. Massa, A. El-Nouby et al. , “Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. [5] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma, H. Khedr, R. R¨ adle, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson et al. , “Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. [6] W. Yue, J. Zhang, K. Hu, Y. Xia, J. Luo, and Z. Wang, “Surgical-sam: Efficient class promptable surgical instrument segmentation,” in 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, no. 7, 2024, pp. 6890–6898. [7] J. Zhu, A. Hamdi, Y. Qi, Y. Jin, and J. Wu, “Medical sam 2: Segment medical images as video via segment anything model 2,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00874 , 2024. [8] D. Bati´ c, F. Holm, E. ¨Ozsoy, T. Czempiel, and N. Navab, “Endovit: pretraining vision transformers on a large collection of endoscopic images,” International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery , vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1085–1091, 2024. [9] P. Dermyer, A. Kalra, and M. Schwartz, “Endodino: A foundation model for gi endoscopy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05488 , 2025. [10] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, W. Chen et al. , “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.” 

Iclr , vol. 1, no. 2, p. 3, 2022. [11] K. Phuntsho, Abdullah, K. Lee, I. Lee, and E. Ahn, “Adaptation of foundation models for medical image analysis: Strategies, challenges, and future directions,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2511.01284 [12] Y. Shen, J. Li, X. Shao, B. Inigo Romillo, A. Jindal, D. Dreizin, and M. Unberath, “Fastsam3d: An efficient segment anything model for 3d volumetric medical images,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2024, pp. 542–552. [13] R. D. Soberanis-Mukul, J. Cheng, J. E. Mangulabnan, S. S. Vedula, M. Ishii, G. Hager, R. H. Taylor, and M. Unberath, “Gsam+ cutie: text-promptable tool mask annotation for endoscopic video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , 2024, pp. 2388–2394. [14] B. D. Killeen, L. J. Wang, B. I˜ n´ ıgo, H. Zhang, M. Armand, R. H. Taylor, G. Osgood, and M. Unberath, “Fluorosam: A language-promptable foundation model for flexible x-ray image segmentation,” in Interna-tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2025, pp. 248–258. [15] J. Pan, Z. Lin, X. Zhu, J. Shao, and H. Li, “St-adapter: Parameter-efficient image-to-video transfer learning,” Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , vol. 35, pp. 26 462–26 477, 2022. [16] Z. Wang, C. Liu, S. Zhang, and Q. Dou, “Foundation model for endoscopy video analysis via large-scale self-supervised pre-train,” in 

International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention . Springer, 2023, pp. 101–111. [17] Q. Tian, H. Liao, X. Huang, B. Yang, D. Lei, S. Ourselin, and H. Liu, “Endomamba: an efficient foundation model for endoscopic videos via hierarchical pre-training,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2025, pp. 224–234. [18] H. Li, D. Lu, J. d’Almeida, D. Isik, E. K. Aghdam, N. DiSanto, A. Acar, S. Sharma, J. Y. Wu, R. J. Webster III et al. , “Monocular absolute depth estimation from endoscopy via domain-invariant feature learning and latent consistency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02247 , 2025. [19] Y. Qin, J. Chang, L. Li, and M. Wu, “Enhancing gastroenterology with multimodal learning: the role of large language model chatbots in digestive endoscopy,” Frontiers in Medicine , vol. 12, p. 1583514, 2025. [20] C. Gao, A. Feng, X. Liu, R. H. Taylor, M. Armand, and M. Unberath, “A fully differentiable framework for 2d/3d registration and the projective spatial transformers,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 275–285, 2023. [21] C. Gao, B. D. Killeen, Y. Hu, R. B. Grupp, R. H. Taylor, M. Armand, and M. Unberath, “Synthetic data accelerates the development of gen-eralizable learning-based algorithms for x-ray image analysis,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 294–308, 2023. [22] B. Cui, M. Islam, L. Bai, and H. Ren, “Surgical-dino: adapter learning of foundation models for depth estimation in endoscopic surgery,” 

International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery ,vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1013–1020, 2024. [23] T. Deng, Y. Pan, S. Yuan, D. Li, C. Wang, M. Li, L. Chen, L. Xie, D. Wang, J. Wang et al. , “What is the best 3d scene representation for robotics? from geometric to foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03422 , 2025. [24] H. Shu, R. D. Soberanis-Mukul, J. Xu, H. Ding, M. Ringel, M. Shen, S. I. Sayed, H. Rafii-Tari, and M. Unberath, “Bronchopt: Vision-based pose optimization with fine-tuned foundation models for accurate bronchoscopy navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.09443 , 2025. [25] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929 [26] M. Caron, H. Touvron, I. Misra, H. J´ egou, J. Mairal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin, “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 9650–9660. [27] Q. Zhang, M. Chen, A. Bukharin, N. Karampatziakis, P. He, Y. Cheng, W. Chen, and T. Zhao, “Adalora: Adaptive budget allocation for parameter-efficient fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10512 , 2023. [28] T. Park, A. A. Efros, R. Zhang, and J.-Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning for unpaired image-to-image translation,” in European conference on computer vision . Springer, 2020, pp. 319–345. [29] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018. [30] O. Sim´ eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose, V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ramamonjisoa et al. , “Dinov3,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 , 2025. [31] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 2223–2232. [32] A. Paruchuri, S. Ehrenstein, S. Wang, I. Fried, S. M. Pizer, M. Nietham-mer, and R. Sengupta, “Leveraging near-field lighting for monocular depth estimation from endoscopy videos,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2024, pp. 473–491. [33] T. L. Bobrow, M. Golhar, R. Vijayan, V. S. Akshintala, J. R. Garcia, and N. J. Durr, “Colonoscopy 3d video dataset with paired depth from 2d-3d registration,” Medical image analysis , vol. 90, p. 102956, 2023. [34] D. Eigen, C. Puhrsch, and R. Fergus, “Depth map prediction from a single image using a multi-scale deep network,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 27, 2014. [35] R. Ranftl, A. Bochkovskiy, and V. Koltun, “Vision transformers for dense prediction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 12 179–12 188. [36] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao, “Depth anything v2,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , vol. 37, pp. 21 875–21 911, 2024.