Title: 2607.26703v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.26703v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2026 00:41:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
RESEARCH Cognitive Computation  (2026) 18:91          

> https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-026-10637-z
> Katharina Bendig
> katharina.bendig@dfki.de
> René Schuster
> rene.schuster@dfki.de
> Didier Stricker
> didier.stricker@dfki.de
> 1RPTU – Technical University Kaiserslautern-Landau,
> Gottlieb-Daimler-Straße 47, Kaiserslautern 67663, Germany
> 2DFKI –German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence,
> Trippstadter Str. 122, Kaiserslautern 67663, Germany

Abstract 

Event cameras follow a retina-inspired sensing principle, reporting local intensity changes asynchronously with high 

temporal resolution and a wide dynamic range. Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) complement these sparse event streams 

through brain-inspired dynamics, using sparse spikes and leaky membrane potentials to integrate information over time. 

However, many SNN object detectors process isolated event intervals with a single label and reset the network state after 

each prediction, thereby underusing temporal information in continuous event streams. We introduce Sequence-SOD, a 

sequence-aware SNN object detector that processes extended event sequences containing labels at multiple time points. 

Events are accumulated into short intervals, discretized into temporal steps, and fed sequentially to an SSD-style Spik -

ing DenseNet while preserving membrane potentials across intervals within a sequence, so that detection is driven by an 

evolving neural state instead of independently reset input windows. On the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset, sequence-

aware training improves mAP from 23.38 for single-interval training to 25.30 without augmentation and to 26.88 with 

event-data augmentation. The model achieves a theoretical prediction frequency of 40 Hz. Training and evaluating SNN 

object detectors on extended event sequences improves their ability to exploit temporal cues while preserving the energy-

efficiency  benefits  of  sparse  spiking  computation.  The  results  highlight  sequence-aware  training  as  a complementary 

direction to architectural improvements for event-based SNN detection. 

Keywords  Event camera  · Spiking neural network  · Object detection  · Event-based vision 

> Received: 1 December 2023 / Accepted: 20 July 2026
> © The Author(s) 2026

# Sequence-SOD: Bio-inspired Sequence-aware Spiking Object 

# Detection for Event Cameras 

Katharina Bendig 1 · René Schuster 1,2  · Didier Stricker 1,2 

where such delays may result in fatal consequences. There -

fore, event cameras recently emerged, which follow a ret -

ina-inspired sensing principle: each pixel asynchronously 

reports local logarithmic intensity changes instead of abso -

lute intensity frames [ 1, 2] in order to achieve a high tem -

poral resolution in the magnitude of microseconds. They 

further cover a high dynamic range (about 140 dB compared 

to 60 dB by standard cameras), which allows the detection 

of movements even in low light settings. Similar to biologi -

cal retinas, event camera pixels adapt to very dark as well 

as very bright stimuli, which helps explain their robustness 

under changing illumination [ 2]. Combined with their low 

power consumption, this makes event cameras highly suit -

able for the usage in automotive edge applications. 

However, the inherent sparsity and temporal nature of the 

event  data  make  it  difficult  to  apply  traditional  frame-based 

object detection approaches. A more natural neuromorphic 

approach to processing events involves the use of Spiking Neu -

ral Networks (SNNs) [ 3], which are motivated by neural com -

putation in the brain: neurons exchange sparse spike events, 

# Introduction 

Particularly in highly dynamic scenes, standard frame-based 

cameras reveal their poor performance in terms of motion 

blur and nighttime sensing. Their static frame rate further 

hinders capturing rapid movements of cars and trains, which 

can cover meters in mere milliseconds. This poses a criti -

cal limitation, especially in autonomous driving scenarios 1 3 91  Page 2 of 13 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

integrate incoming signals in a membrane potential, leak this 

state over time, and emit an output spike only when a threshold is 

reached. This makes memory and computation local to the neu -

ron dynamics, following the neuromorphic view that processing 

and memory can be coupled rather than treated as separate oper -

ations [ 4, 5]. Consequently, SNNs can replace multiplications 

in a traditional Articial Neural Network (ANN) with additions 

or simple memory readouts, resulting in a reduced number of 

machine operations. This makes SNNs very compelling as both 

energy-efficient  networks  and  stateful  models  for  event-driven 

perception at a time when energy consumption is a critical issue, 

particularly in autonomous vehicles. 

Real-world scenarios demand continuous data stream pro -

cessing,  where  perception  benefits  from  integrating  recent 

evidence instead of repeatedly solving independent snapshot 

problems. SNNs provide this temporal integration through the 

membrane potential of each spiking neuron, a brain-inspired 

internal state for local memory and processing in neuromor -

phic systems [ 6]. If no input current arrives, this potential 

decays over time, which means that SNNs are able to naturally 

handle cases in which no events are detected. However, cur -

rent spiking object detectors, like the one by Cordone et al. [ 7], 

only consider the time steps in a single time interval and then 

reset the internal state of the SNNs after one prediction, which 

is illustrated in Fig.  1. Instead, we propose  Sequence-SOD ,

our sequence-aware approach trained on extended sequences 

encompassing  multiple  labels  across  different  time  points  in 

event data. This method preserves the spiking neurons’ inner 

states within a sequence, keeping the neural memory mecha -

nism active while the event stream evolves, as depicted in Fig. 

1b. The internal state is reset only at the boundary between 

independent sequences. Theoretically, the sequential process -

ing of 25 ms time steps enables bounding-box predictions at a 

frequency of about 40 Hz. 

The main contribution of this paper is a sequence-aware 

training and evaluation strategy for SNN-based object detec -

tion that explicitly treats membrane potentials as the model’s 

temporal memory for continuous perception. In particular: 

● We introduce a sequence-aware training approach for 

object detection using SNNs. In contrast to single-inter -

val SNN detectors, our approach considers whole event 

sequences  that  may  contain  multiple  labels  at  different 

points in time and maintains the membrane state across 

the intervals of one sequence, leveraging leaky integra -

tion and decay instead of resetting this state after each 

prediction. 

● We  analyze  the  effect  of  this  sequence-aware  setting  on 

real-world automotive event data and show that it im -

proves detection performance over single-interval SNN 

training with the same SSD-based Spiking DenseNet 

architecture. 

● We further evaluate event-data augmentation and com -

pare the estimated inference energy consumption of our 

SNN architecture with the corresponding ANN. 

# Related Work 

Spiking Neural Networks 

The work by Maass and Markram [ 8] has shown that in 

theory SNNs have exactly the same expressive power as 

ANNs.  In  addition,  they  are  not  only  more  energy  efficient 

but also show a greater potential in handling event data 

compared to ANNs [ 9]. 

When modelling SNNs, the most common design is the 

Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron model, whose dis -

cretized variant can be described in the following way [ 10 ]: 

U [t] = βU [t − 1] 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> decay

+ W X [t]

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> input

− Sout [t − 1] θ

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> reset

. (1) 

The spiking functionality integrates the weighted sum of the 

incoming spikes  WX [t] into the membrane potential  U of 

the spiking neuron.  U exponentially decays with a rate  β

to  decrease  the  influence  of  temporally  uncorrelated  data.  

> Fig. 1 Resetting methods of the inner state of SNNs

# 1 3 Page 3 of 13  91 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

When the membrane potential reaches a certain threshold  θ

an output spike is generated and  U is reset accordingly. 

The disadvantage of this spiking behavior is that it is 

non-differentiable  and  therefore  the  common  backpropaga -

tion algorithms from ANN training are not directly transfer -

able. So far, three alternative approaches for the challenging 

training of SNNs have been proposed: Biology-inspired 

training, conversion from ANNs, and direct training. 

Biologically plausible methods, such as Spiketiming-

dependent plasticity (STDP) [ 11 ], adjust the weights of 

synapses based on the correlation of the spike behavior of 

pre- and post-synaptic neurons. However, the locality of 

updates  makes  it  difficult  to  train  deep  networks,  rendering 

biological  approaches  insufficient  for  complex  tasks  such  as 

object detection. 

Another option is the conversion of a pre-trained ANN 

into a SNN by weight-normalization, as there is a correla -

tion  between  the  ReLU  activation  and  the  firing  rate  of  a

spiking neuron [ 12 ]. However, this requires the input to be 

rate encoded, which means that the number of spikes has to 

be proportional to the pixel intensity. Consequently, achiev -

ing approximately the same accuracy as the pre-trained 

ANN requires very high latency, defeating the goal of low 

energy consumption [ 13 ]. Furthermore, event data is not 

suitable as input for ANNs due to its inherent sparsity and 

asynchronous nature. 

The most promising approach is direct training using sur -

rogate gradients [ 14 ].  To  overcome  the  non-differentiability 

of the binary spikes, the gradient is approximated during 

the  backward  pass.  This  also  has  the  advantage  of  defining 

a small gradient even when no spike occurs, ensuring the 

presence of a training signal in such scenarios. 

Event-Data Object Detection 

ANN-Based Object Detection 

Event-based object detection has been addressed with a 

broad range of input representations and network architec -

tures. The sparsity, high temporal resolution, and asynchro -

nous nature of event data make this task challenging for 

conventional frame-based detectors, but they also motivate 

architectures that explicitly preserve temporal information. 

A common strategy is to convert the asynchronous event 

stream into dense tensors that can be processed by conven -

tional ANNs, for example through event frames that accu -

mulate  events  over  a fixed  time  window  or  event  count  [15 ,

16 ], time-surface representations that encode recent event 

timestamps at each pixel [ 17 ], or learned/custom accumula -

tion layers that transform events into convolution-friendly 

inputs [ 18 ]. Such representations make event data compat -

ible with mature feed-forward detectors, but the resulting 

models typically process isolated temporal windows. Con -

sequently, temporal information from earlier parts of the 

stream may be lost unless the detector includes an explicit 

recurrent, attention-based, or otherwise stateful mechanism. 

Recent ANN-based detectors have increasingly focused 

on  temporal  memory  and  efficient  sequence  modelling  for 

event-camera object detection. The Recurrent Event-camera 

Detector (RED) [ 19 ] combines convolutional layers with 

ConvLSTM  units  and  demonstrates  the  benefit  of  recurrent 

state modelling for high-resolution event-camera detection. 

ASTMNet [ 20 ] further exploits spatio-temporal recurrence 

and attention. SODFormer [ 21 ] formulates streaming object 

detection from events and frames as an end-to-end sequence 

prediction problem with asynchronous attention-based 

fusion. GET [ 22 ] introduces group tokens that decouple tem -

poral-polarity information from spatial information within 

a Transformer backbone. Zubic et al. [ 23 ] propose State 

Space Models (SSMs) with learnable time-scale parameters 

for  event  cameras,  enabling  adaptation  to  different  temporal 

scales without retraining. RVT [ 24 ] combines convolutional 

priors, local and global self-attention, and recurrent temporal 

aggregation  to  achieve  strong  accuracy–latency  trade-offs. 

Building on this line of work, SAST [ 25 ] applies scene-adap -

tive  sparsification  to  an  RVT-style  window-based  Transformer 

while retaining recurrent temporal processing. SMamba [ 26 ]

combines sparse Mamba-style modelling with ConvLSTM 

modules for spatio-temporal information propagation, and 

EvRT-DETR [ 27 ] augments RT-DETR [ 28 ] with lightweight 

ConvLSTM-based memory modules to handle event-frame 

sequences. Together, these works show that retaining, select -

ing, and propagating temporal information remains central to 

accurate  and  efficient  event-based  object  detection. 

SNN-Based Object Detection 

SNNs  are  a natural  fit  for  event-camera  data  because  they 

process sparse binary spikes and maintain a temporal state 

through their membrane potentials. They handle small time 

steps of event data sequentially, allowing a high prediction 

frequency. Early SNN-based detectors for automotive event 

data include the DenseNet-based SSD detector of Cordone 

et al. [ 7], which demonstrated that directly trained spiking 

networks can be applied to event-based object detection. 

More recent work has aimed to improve the accuracy, fea -

ture representation, and training stability of SNN detectors. 

Su et al. [ 29 ] propose a directly trained spiking YOLO-style 

detector, while SFOD [ 30 ] introduces multi-scale spiking 

feature fusion for event-camera object detection. Spiking 

CenterNet [ 31 ] combines a CenterNet-style spiking detector 

with knowledge distillation, and SpikingViT [ 32 ] incorpo -

rates spiking computation into a multi-scale Vision Trans -

former architecture. 1 3 91  Page 4 of 13 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

Several recent methods further investigate how event 

representation, temporal processing, and hybrid architec -

tures can improve SNN-based detection. SpikeFPN [ 33 ]

introduces a spiking feature pyramid network with an adap -

tive threshold mechanism in selected spiking modules. 

Hybrid SNN–ANN designs [ 34 ] combine spiking layers 

with conventional ANN components, using attention-based 

bridge modules to transform sparse spatio-temporal spike 

features into dense feature maps for the non-spiking detec -

tor stages. Hybrid spiking Transformer models such as 

HsVT [ 35 ] similarly combine spiking computation with 

Transformer-style spatial and temporal feature extraction to 

capture both local event structure and longer-range tempo -

ral dependencies. SpikeYOLO [ 36 ] simplifies  YOLO-style 

detection for spiking computation and introduces integer-

valued training with spike-driven inference, while Train -

able Spiking-YOLO [ 37 ] uses trainable spiking detection 

modules and membrane-potential decoding to improve low-

latency object detection. Together, these methods show that 

stronger SNN object-detection architectures and training 

strategies can substantially reduce the performance gap to 

conventional detectors. 

Two closely related developments to our work are 

SpikingViT [ 32 ] and STMOD [ 38 ], both of which fur -

ther emphasize the importance of temporal processing for 

event-based  SNN  detection.  SpikingViT  studies  the  effect 

of  different  input  lengths  for  a multi-scale  spiking  Vision 

Transformer with a YOLOX-style detection head, while 

STMOD proposes a spike tensor-based multi-scale detec -

tor with a cross-attention spatio-temporal spike generator, 

an SNN backbone, and an asymmetric decoupled detec -

tion head. Since both methods combine spiking modules 

with non-spiking detector components, we regard them as 

hybrid SNN-based architectures rather than strictly fully 

spiking end-to-end detectors. Their temporal ablations and 

streaming-oriented design choices support our motivation, 

but their results are coupled with substantial architectural 

changes; in contrast, our work isolates sequence-aware 

training and evaluation in an SSD-style Spiking DenseNet 

by preserving membrane states across consecutive event 

intervals with multiple possible label timestamps. 

Overall, recent SNN-based and hybrid SNN-based detec -

tors mainly focus on architectural design, event encoding, 

feature fusion, neuron models, detection heads, or training 

strategies. In contrast, our work studies how an existing 

fully spiking detector can exploit the temporal continuity of 

event streams through sequence-aware training and evalu -

ation. This is particularly relevant for real-world event-

camera applications, where detectors operate on continuous 

streams and can use spiking neuron states as temporal mem -

ory across labeled and unlabeled intervals. 

# Method 

Seeking to fully leverage the temporal resolution of event 

data and the stateful dynamics of spiking neurons [ 6], our 

object detection approach processes entire sequences of 

events  containing  labels  at  different  time  steps,  rather  than 

processing individual event samples one at a time. In our 

approach, events are initially accumulated into short time 

intervals. Each event interval is then divided into 5 equally-

sized time steps which are fed to the network sequentially. 

The network output belonging to one interval is averaged 

over these 5 internal time steps for the bounding-box and 

class prediction. The detection loss is applied to this aver -

aged interval-level prediction when a label is available for 

the corresponding interval. Thus, the same label is not used 

as  five  independent  training  targets.  Notably,  the  membrane 

potentials of the spiking neurons are not reset between time 

intervals within one sequence, which lets the detector retain 

useful recent evidence and discard outdated information 

through membrane leakage. The state is reset only between 

independent sequences. 

Sequential Event Data Processing 

The pixels of an event camera register logarithmic intensity 

changes in an asynchronous manner. An event occurring at 

the pixel position  (xi, y i) at time  ti is  commonly  defined 

as a tuple  ei = ( xi, y i, t i, p i). Depending on whether the 

brightness increases or decreases, events have either a posi -

tive or negative polarity  pi ∈ { 1, −1}.

Due to the challenges associated with training deep 

SNNs on neuromorphic hardware, we simulate the compu -

tations in the form of time steps on a Graphics Processing 

Unit (GPU). Consequently, processing event data asynchro -

nously becomes computationally infeasible, leading us to 

accumulate events in short time intervals  ∆t = [ ta, t b) of 

125 ms. 

Inspired by the event data handling by Gehrig and Scar -

amuzza [ 24 ], we choose a simple pre-processing method 

creating event histograms  E in the shape ( T, 2,  H, W) with  T

representing the number of time steps discretized from  ∆t

and ( H, W) denoting the height and width of the event sen -

sor. We choose to not further divide the time steps into time 

bins, since Cordone et al. [ 7] showed that time bins do not 

improve the performance for  T ≥ 5. Moreover, we accumu -

late  events  of  different  polarities  separately  in  two  channels. 

A stream of events  E is thus processed in the following way: 

E(τ, p, x, y ) = 

∑

> ei∈E

δ(τ − τi) · δ(p − pi) · δ(x − xi) · δ(y − yi), (2) 1 3 Page 5 of 13  91 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

τi =

⌊ ti − ta

tb − ta

· T

⌋

, (3) 

with  δ(·) as the Kronecker delta function. Equation  2 assigns 

each event to exactly one histogram entry according to its 

discrete time index, polarity, and spatial position. Equa -

tion  3 maps the continuous timestamp  ti from the interval 

[ta, t b) to a discrete index  τi ∈ { 0, . . . , T − 1} by subtract -

ing the interval start time, normalizing by the interval dura -

tion, multiplying by  T, and  applying  the  floor  operation. 

Additionally, we consider whole sequences of the event 

stream during training with a sequence length of  s, which is 

visualized in Fig.  2. One training sequence includes  s time 

intervals, each containing an event histogram with  T = 5 

time steps over  ∆t = 125  ms. Since bounding-box labels in 

our selected dataset are generated based on the correspond -

ing RGB images, they are intermittently available rather 

than  continuously  present,  appearing  at  different  points  in 

time with varying frequencies. Consequently, not all time 

intervals within an event sequence contain bounding boxes. 

We ensure that at least one label is present in each train -

ing sequence. For unlabeled intervals, the network state is 

propagated forward, but no detection loss is computed. For 

labeled intervals, the output is accumulated over the  T inter -

nal  time  steps  and  averaged  before  the  classification  and 

localization losses are applied. This creates an interval-level 

prediction aligned with the available label rather than dupli -

cating the same label across all internal time steps. 

The  inner  state  of  an  SNN,  reflected  in  the  membrane 

potential of its neurons, acts as a compact memory trace 

of prior event inputs. This stored information, temporally 

correlated with subsequent inputs, contributes to future pre -

dictions. Unlike prior spiking object detection methods that 

reset the membrane potential after each label occurrence, 

our SNN maintains its inner state throughout the process -

ing of one sequence and resets it only between indepen -

dent sequences. Previous methods failed to harness the full 

potential of temporal information within event data. Pro -

cessing whole sequences compels the network to prioritize 

essential temporal cues, which connects the cognitive moti -

vation of stateful perception directly to the detection task. 

Individual  spiking  neurons  have  a finite  capacity  and  as  the 

input sequence lengthens, they must process an increas -

ing volume of incoming data over time. Consequently, the 

network is forced to learn a more meaningful inner state 

representation of the current scenario, discarding redundant 

information to process new stimuli. Multiple labels at dif -

ferent points in time prompt the network to generate accu -

rate predictions not only at the sequence’s end but also at 

intermediate labeled intervals. This compels the network to 

consistently maintain an expressive inner state representa -

tion, facilitating ongoing predictions in a continuous stream 

of information. 

Network Architecture 

For consistent comparability, our approach follows the 

methodology of Cordone et al. [ 7] by adopting the SSD 

object detection framework [ 39 ] with a Spiking DenseNet 

(depth of 121 and a growth rate of 24) as its backbone. The 

dense connectivity pattern of DenseNet [ 40 ] enhances the 

propagation of gradients, which is especially important for 

SNNs since the gradient can only be approximated. Fol -

lowing the example of Cordone et al. [ 7], we replace the 

ReLU activations with Parametric Leaky Integrate-and-Fire 

(PLIF) [ 41 ] neurons, which in contrast to conventional LIF 

neurons include the decay rate  β as a trainable parameter. 

This choice keeps the architecture comparable to Cordone 

et al. [ 7] while allowing the membrane time constant to 

adapt to the temporal statistics of the event stream, so that 

different  neurons  can  learn  how  quickly  they  should  retain 

or forget recent evidence. 

The DenseNet architecture includes batch normaliza -

tion, which seems to play a crucial role in the training of                    

> Fig. 2 Visualization of the sampling strategies. Black markers denote
> consecutive event intervals. The blue bracket illustrates a single-label
> sample, which consists of one event interval ∆t, whereas the green
> bracket illustrates a sequence sample of length s, which contains s
> consecutive event intervals with multiple labels. Orange markers
> indicate time points at which bounding-box labels are available. The
> red marker highlights one exemplary labeled interval. The figure is
> schematic; unless stated otherwise, the experiments use strain = 5 ,
> ∆t= 125 ms, and T= 5

# 1 3 91  Page 6 of 13 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

our SNN. However, after training, it is possible to construct 

a mathematically equivalent network that absorbs the batch 

normalization parameters into the convolutional layers [ 42 ]. 

Therefore, our network can be seen as a pure SNN during 

inference, leveraging all the advantages in terms of energy 

efficiency  of  the  spiking  computations. 

In contrast to previous recurrent object detectors 

[19 , 20 , 24 ], which process multiple time steps jointly, 

our spiking approach processes an input tensor of shape 

(2,  H, W) at  each  time  step.  The  final  prediction  of  the 

bounding boxes and classes for one interval is calculated 

by accumulating the network output over  T time steps 

and dividing it by  T. During training, gradients are back -

propagated through the unrolled sequence of SNN states. 

The  non-differentiable  spike  function  is  handled  using 

surrogate gradients, following direct SNN training. Thus, 

the loss at labeled intervals updates both spatial weights 

and temporal membrane-state dynamics across preceding 

intervals.  Beyond  the  initial  five  time  steps  (equivalent  to 

125 ms), the output accumulation can be performed with 

a sliding window approach for the rest of the sequence. 

Consequently, the network is theoretically able to output 

bounding-box predictions after every 25 ms time step (= 

40  Hz),  effectively  leveraging  the  high  temporal  resolu -

tion of the event camera. However, the prediction fre -

quency relies on the input data and may improve with 

smaller time steps, albeit potentially impacting perfor -

mance negatively. 

# Experiments and Results 

Setup 

Dataset  As we focus on object detection on event data in an 

automotive setting, we test our method on the Gen1 Auto -

motive Detection Dataset [ 43 ]. The dataset contains 39 h 

of event camera recordings from diverse driving scenarios 

with a resolution of 304 px  × 240 px. Its 255 k labels con -

sist of bounding boxes for pedestrians and cars provided 

at frequencies between 1 and 4 Hz. In the fashion of pre -

vious work [ 19 , 20 , 24 ], we do not consider small bound -

ing boxes with any side length  ≤ 10 px or a diagonal  ≤ 30 

px. The smallest temporal gap between two bounding-box 

annotations in the dataset is 250 ms. We therefore construct 

sequence samples every 125 ms, i.e. at half of this small -

est label interval, to align the event-interval sampling grid 

with possible label timestamps while still propagating the 

SNN state through intermediate unlabeled intervals. For 

example, two consecutive labels separated by 250 ms can be 

connected  by  two  125  ms  event  intervals.  The  first  interval 

updates the membrane state, and the interval associated with 

an available label receives the detection loss. 

Since it is a widely used metric for object detection, 

we report the mean Average Precision (mAP) over 10 IoU 

thresholds with the starting value 0.5, an increment of 0.05, 

and an ending value of 0.95. AP 50  and AP 75  denote Average 

Precision at IoU thresholds of 0.50 and 0.75, respectively. 

AP car  and AP ped  report  class-specific  Average  Precision  for 

cars and pedestrians. 

Implementation  We adopt standard training strategies 

based on the implementation of Cordone et al. [ 7], utilizing 

an AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of 1  × 10 −4 and 

implementing a cosine decay for the learning rate. Addition -

ally, we train with a batch size of 14 and an initial learning 

rate of 4  × 10 −5. The batch size is limited by the mem -

ory requirements of sequence-based SNN training through 

time. For the event data input, we consider sequences of 

length  strain = 5 , where each time interval consists of a 

discretized 125 ms time window which is further divided 

into  T = 5  time steps. Unless stated otherwise,  T is  fixed 

to 5 in all experiments. This results in internal time steps of 

25 ms and therefore a theoretical prediction frequency of 40 

Hz. Just like Cordone et al. [ 7], we utilize the Focal Loss 

[44 ] for  the  classification  task,  since  it  efficiently  addresses 

the class imbalance issue, as well as a smooth L1 loss for 

the box regression. We evaluate the trained models after 

110 epochs and report the best-performing checkpoints 

according to validation performance. Inspired by the work 

of Gehrig and Scaramuzza [ 24 ],  we  study  the  influence  of 

data  augmentation,  including  horizontal  flipping  and  zoom -

ing in/out during training, in Section “ Data Augmentation ”. 

The SSD-style post-processing follows the baseline 

detector and includes Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS). 

For NMS we use the same parameters as in Cordone et al. 

[7] to ensure comparability. 

Ablation Study 

In this section, we explore the key factors that consider -

ably  influence  our  approach’s  performance.  We  investigate 

the  effect  of  sequence  length  during  training  and  assess  the 

influence  of  event  data  augmentation  on  training  our  SNN. 

The experiments are conducted on the Gen1 Automotive 

Detection Dataset [ 43 ]. 

Sequence Length 

Table  1 shows the results obtained by training our network 

on a single time interval  strain = 1  and a longer sequence 1 3 Page 7 of 13  91 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

length  strain = 5 . We  test  the  resulting  networks  on  different 

sequence lengths  stest , including  full  sequences of the test 

split of the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset. A sequence 

is considered  full  if the maximum temporal gap between 

labels is 200 time intervals. Since one interval corresponds 

to 125 ms, this limit corresponds to 25 s. Sequences with 

larger temporal gaps are split in order to avoid excessive 

computation on long stretches without any label. We focus 

on  strain = 1  and  strain = 5  to compare the prior single-

interval setting with our sequence-aware setting while keep -

ing  all  other  architectural  choices  fixed.  The  data  suggests 

a performance improvement corresponding to the length of 

the training sequence. This improvement is observed across 

both  object  classes  and  different  IoU  thresholds.  Training 

on longer sequences compels the network to prioritize the 

storage of important temporal information in its inner net -

work state. The capacity of a single spiking neuron is lim -

ited, and during the processing of larger amounts of data, 

the  network  has  to  restrict  the  information  flow  in  order  to 

achieve  the  desired  firing  of  the  output  neurons.  A longer 

sequence  can  also  contain  multiple  labels  at  different  points 

in time, pushing the network to output correct predictions 

throughout the sequence. Therefore, even when tested on 

short sequences the network trained with  strain = 5  per -

forms better. The data further shows that the performance of 

the  strain = 1  training decreases slightly when tested on the 

full  sequence, indicating that the network is not able to fully 

leverage past temporal information because its membrane 

potentials are reset during training. Especially, its prediction 

for pedestrians dropped, posing a harder challenge due to 

more variety in movement. Figure  3 visualizes the results 

for the networks trained on sequence lengths 1 and 5 tested 

on  full  sequences. It can be seen that the network trained on 

longer sequences is more capable of detecting multiple enti -

ties even with a small number of events in one time interval, 

as in Fig.  3a.  Furthermore,  it  better  differentiates  between 

multiple object instances due to past temporal cues, as dem -

onstrated in Fig.  3d.                                                                                         

> Table 1 Evaluation of different training sequence lengths strain on various test sequence lengths stest of the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset.
> strain stest ∆tin ms mAP AP 50 AP 75 AP car AP ped
> 11125 23.38 47.23 20.97 35.39 11.36
> 15125 23.63 47.74 21.02 35.42 11.83
> 1full 125 23.04 45.89 20.68 35.17 10.92
> 51125 25.26 50.98 21.88 36.09 14.43
> 55125 25.31 50.99 21.89 36.05 14.57
> 5full 125 25.30 51.49 21.91 35.87 14.72
> Fig. 3 Visualization of the predictions on the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset [ 43 ]with different training sequence lengths along with the
> ground truth bounding boxes, showing the network behavior in different scenarios (varying density of events and varying number of objects)

# 1 3 91  Page 8 of 13 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

Data Augmentation 

Following the example of Gehrig and Scaramuzza [ 24 ], we 

examine  during  training  the  effect  of  the  following  random -

ized event data augmentations on the performance of our 

SNN:  horizontal  flipping,  zooming  in,  and  zooming  out.  We 

randomly  choose  whether  to  use  no  augmentation,  or  flip -

ping and/or zooming, and then apply this choice to a whole 

sequence. For any resizing operation we use exact nearest 

neighbor interpolation in order to keep the data in its binary 

format. To zoom in, we crop the sample randomly along its 

spatial dimensions and then resize it to the original resolu -

tion. For zooming out, we down-sample the whole sequence 

spatially and place it at a random location within a zero ten -

sor of the original size. Our parameter choice with respect to 

the randomness follows the one of Gehrig and Scaramuzza 

[24 ]. Table  2 shows  the  results  of  the  different  augmentation 

methods applied to the training based on sequence length 5. 

We can see that augmentation plays an important role for 

the  training  of  SNNs.  Zooming  is  most  effective,  especially 

for pedestrians, which usually appear smaller than cars in 

real world data, possibly due to an increased focus on par -

ticular features of otherwise small objects. Zoom-in alone 

achieves the highest AP 50  and AP ped , while the combination 

of all three augmentations yields the highest overall mAP 

and AP 75 . This indicates that zoom-in is particularly ben -

eficial  for  small-object  recognition,  whereas  the  combined 

augmentation improves robustness at stricter localization 

thresholds. All reported test results are obtained without 

applying these augmentations during testing. 

Benchmark Comparison 

In this section, we contrast our sequence-aware SNN 

approach  Sequence-SOD  with previous event-based object 

detection methods, evaluating their performance on the Gen1 

Automotive Detection Dataset. A summary of the results is 

presented in Table  3. The table includes a broad comparison 

of ANN-based, hybrid, and SNN-based detectors; however, 

the most important comparison for our study is Cordone et al. 

[7], which uses the same SSD-style Spiking DenseNet archi -

tecture but is trained on isolated event intervals. Testing the 

benefits  of  our  sequence-aware  training  and  evaluation  strat -

egy on other detector architectures remains future work. 

The results show that methods with explicit temporal 

modelling, such as recurrent, Transformer-based, and hybrid 

architectures, generally achieve substantially higher Gen1 

accuracy than early feed-forward event-frame detectors. 

Hybrid SNN–ANN approaches and hybrid spiking Trans -

former models also report strong results, suggesting that 

combining spiking computation with non-spiking modules 

can improve detection accuracy. Recent SNN-based detec -

tors further narrow the gap by improving event encoding, 

feature fusion, neuron models, and detection heads. These 

trends  confirm  that  architecture  remains  an  important  factor, 

but they are largely orthogonal to the question studied here. 

In our work, we demonstrate the importance of a tem -

poral inner state for SNNs. This can be seen by comparing 

our results to ODSNN [ 7], which resets the spiking state 

after isolated event intervals. The numbers indicate that 

training on longer sequences improves the performance by 

enforcing a meaningful inner state representation, which is 

able to discard dispensable information and prioritize sig -

nificant  temporal  cues.  Without  augmentation,  sequence-

aware training improves mAP from 23.38 to 25.30, showing 

that the sequence formulation itself contributes to the gain. 

With augmentation, the result increases further to 26.88. 

We  therefore  separate  the  effect  of  sequence-aware  training 

from  the  effect  of  data  augmentation. 

Compared with more recent SNN-based detectors such 

as EMS-YOLO [ 29 ], SFOD [ 30 ], and SpikeFPN [ 33 ], 

Sequence-SOD is not intended to compete primarily through 

architectural novelty. These methods improve the detector 

backbone, feature fusion, or detection head, whereas our 

architecture intentionally follows Cordone et al. [ 7] to iso -

late  the  effect  of  preserving  temporal  state  during  sequence-

aware training and evaluation. 

Energy Consumption 

Apart from their naturally suitable ability to process event 

data,  a very  significant  advantage  of  SNNs  is  in  terms  of 

energy  efficiency.  In  comparison  to  traditional  ANNs,  in 

which all neurons are activated for every iteration, SNNs 

have sparse activations. Furthermore, Multiply and Accu -

mulate (MAC) operations for the synaptic weights are 

replaced by Accumulate (AC) operations in SNNs, since the 

spikes are represented only by zeros and ones.                                     

> Table 2 Application of geometrical augmentation methods for the training on sequence length 5 and tested on full sequences
> h-flip zoom-in zoom-out mAP AP 50 AP 75 AP car AP ped
> 25.30 51.49 21.91 35.87 14.72
> ✓25.40 51.03 22.11 36.19 14.61
> ✓26.85 53.41 23.63 37.80 15.90
> ✓26.29 52.75 23.18 37.66 14.93
> ✓✓✓26.88 52.79 24.65 37.90 15.86

# 1 3 Page 9 of 13  91 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

Following the convention of previous work [ 50 ], we 

determine the energy consumption in terms of the total 

number of Floating point operations (FLOPs) on standard 

CMOS technology. For a standard ANN, the FLOPs for 

multiplication and accumulation in a convolutional layer 

are both calculated by: 

F LOP s M ult  

> conv,l

= F LOP s Ac 

> conv,l

= k2 × Hout × Wout × Cin × Cout , (4) 

with  k as the kernel size,  (Hout , W out ) as the output feature 

map height and width as well as  Cin , C out  as the number of 

input and output channels respectively. 

Since spiking neurons only consume energy when a spike 

occurs, their FLOPs of a layer  l reduce based on the spike 

rate  Rl. An average spike rate can be computed as the total 

number of spikes in a layer for all time steps divided by the 

number of neurons in  l:

Rl =

∑  

> t∈{ 1,...,T },n ∈Nl

Sn

> t

|Nl| , (5) 

with  Nl as the set of neurons in layer  l and  Snt as the binary 

spike if neuron  n fired  at  time  step  t. The resulting spike 

rates per layer for our  Sequence-SOD  with  strain = 5 

and  stest = 1  on the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset 

are shown in Fig.  4. This  figure  is  important  for  the  energy 

analysis  because  the  effective  number  of  SNN  operations  is 

directly scaled by the measured spike rate. Averages over 

entire parts of the network are presented in Table  4.

Additionally, our network contains maxpool layers, 

which  do  not  perform  traditional  floating-point  operations. 

We estimate their FLOPs for ANNs and SNNs as an accu -

mulation operation in the following way: 

F LOP s Ac mp,l = k2 × Hout × Wout × Cin . (6) 

We can now obtain the overall inference energy of an ANN 

(EAN N  ) and of the equivalent SNN ( ESN N  ) across all lay -

ers  l of a network  N:

EAN N = ∑

> l∈N

F LOP s M ult conv,l × EM ult 

+ (F LOP s Ac conv,l + F LOP s Ac mp,l 

) × EAc 

(7) 

ESN N = ∑

> l∈N

(Rl × F LOP s Ac conv,l + F LOP s Ac mp,l 

)

× EAc ,

(8) 

where  EM ult = 3 .7 pJ and  EAc = 0 .9 pJ are the energy 

consumed  by  a 45  nm  CMOS  process  for  a 32-bit  floating-

point multiplication and accumulation operations respec -

tively [ 51 ]. The results of our analysis can be found in Table 

4, showing a large estimated energy advantage of the SNN 

compared to the equivalent ANN. The ANN and SNN have 

Table 3  Comparison to State-of-the-Art on the test split of the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset. Information that is approximated, does not 

apply, or is not available is marked with a star *. The results for the  ⋄ marked papers were taken from Gehrig and Scaramuzza [ 24 ]

Method  Arch.  Det. Head  Seq  Aug  ∆t mAP  Params (M) 

Inception + SSD [ 45 ]⋄ CNN  SSD  ✗ − − 30.1  > 60* 

RRC-Events [ 46 ]⋄ CNN  YOLOv3 [ 47 ] ✗ − − 30.7  > 100* 

YOLOv3 Events [ 48 ]⋄ CNN  YOLOv3 [ 47 ] ✗ − − 31.2  > 60* 

RED [ 19 ] RNN  SSD  ✓ ✗ 50  40.00  24.1 

ASTMNet [ 20 ] RNN  SSD  ✓ ✗ * 46.7  > 100* 

RVT-B [ 24 ] RNN/Trans.  YOLOX [ 49 ] ✓ ✓ 50  47.2  18.5 

RVT-S [ 24 ] RNN/Trans.  YOLOX [ 49 ] ✓ ✓ 50  46.5  9.9 

Hybrid SNN–ANN [ 34 ] Hybrid/RNN  YOLOX [ 49 ] ✓ ✓ 50  43.0  7.7 

HsVT-B [ 35 ] Hybrid/Trans.  Head*  ✓ * 50  47.8  17.2 

EMS-YOLO [ 29 ] SNN  YOLOv3 [ 47 ] ✗ ✗ * 26.7  6.2 

Spiking CenterNet [ 31 ] SNN  CenterNet  ✗ * 100  22.9  13.0 

SpikeFPN [ 33 ] SNN  FPN  ✗ * 60  22.3  22.0 

STMOD [ 38 ] Hybrid/SNN  ADH  ✓ * 5 44.3  6.9 

SFOD [ 30 ] SNN  SSD  ✗ ✓ 100  32.1  11.9 

SpikingViT [ 32 ] Hybrid/SNN/Trans.  YOLOX [ 49 ] ✓ ✓ 50  39.4  21.5 

SpikeYOLO [ 36 ] SNN  YOLO head  ✗ * 2500  40.4  23.1 

ODSNN [ 7] (Baseline)  SNN  SSD  ✗ ✗ 100  18.9  8.2 

S-SOD (ours)  SNN  SSD  ✗ ✗ 125  23.38  8.2 

S-SOD (ours)  SNN  SSD  ✓ ✗ 125  25.30  8.2 

S-SOD (ours)  SNN  SSD  ✓ ✓ 125  26.88  8.2 1 3 91  Page 10 of 13 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

the same underlying convolutional topology, but the ANN 

requires both multiplication and accumulation operations 

for each convolutional operation. In the SNN, binary spikes 

remove the multiplication by the activation value, and the 

effective  accumulation  operations  are  scaled  by  the  spike 

rate  Rl. Thus, the table reports the same architectural accu -

mulation count for the equivalent network but a reduced 

effective  SNN  energy  due  to  sparse  spiking  activity.  It  is 

important to note however, that the energy consumption of 

SNNs  depends  on  the  specific  dataset  and  the  resulting  spike 

rates in contrast to ANNs, which always execute the same 

number of operations. Moreover, SNNs can only achieve 

this  level  of  energy  efficiency,  when  deployed  on  neuromor -

phic hardware. 

# Discussion and Limitations 

The training of SNNs on GPUs poses a great challenge, 

since GPUs are based on synchronous and parallel comput -

ing while the operations in SNNs are event-based. There -

fore, the training can only be simulated using time steps 

and enforces a certain degree of accumulation of events 

into a denser representation. This makes it especially dif -

ficult  to  train  on  long  sequences  of  input  data,  because  the 

gradient has to be computed over all time steps of a whole 

sequence,  leading  to  a trade-off  between  training  time  and 

performance. Using longer sequences that contain multiple 

labels may result in a stronger training signal, however this 

signal will be distributed during backpropagation along the 

space and time dimensions of the network. Furthermore, 

SNNs  still  suffer  from  a lower  accuracy  compared  to  tra -

ditional ANNs and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). 

Our method does not close this gap completely. Instead, 

it addresses one limitation of previous SNN object detec -

tors, namely the reset of the network state after isolated 

event samples. Better training methods, neuron models, and 

detection architectures for SNNs remain important research 

topics. Still, SNNs can achieve a great reduction in energy 

requirements compared to equivalent ANN architectures. 

This study is also limited to the Gen1 Automotive Detec -

tion Dataset and to one SSD-based SNN architecture. We 

selected this setting to ensure direct comparability with pre -

vious SNN object detection work. Validation on additional 

event-based detection datasets and on further SNN detec -

tion architectures would strengthen the generality of the 

conclusions.  In  addition,  we  fixed  T = 5  and  ∆t = 125  ms 

in all reported experiments. These choices provide 25 ms 

internal time steps and align well with the Gen1 annotation 

timing, but a systematic ablation over  T, ∆t, and intermedi -

ate sequence lengths remains future work. 

# Conclusion 

We introduce a sequence-aware training approach for 

event-based object detection with SNNs. The approach 

combines retina-inspired event sensing with brain-inspired 

spiking dynamics by keeping the leaky membrane poten -

tials of the detector active across consecutive event inter -

vals. Our approach uses longer sequences, which include 

labels at multiple points in time, during training in order to 

better mimic continuous real-world usage and the stateful 

nature of event-driven perception. This allows the network 

to prioritize the storage of important temporal cues within 

its internal memory that is represented by the membrane 

potential of the neurons. This leads to increased detection 

performance compared with single-interval SNN training 

under the same architecture. Our network is further able to 

process not only short, single-label samples, but also longer 

sequences of continuous event streams with a theoretical 

prediction frequency of 40 Hz. Future research avenues may 

explore truncated backpropagation techniques, additional 

event-based datasets, intermediate sequence lengths, and  

> Fig. 4 Average Spike Rates over all time steps for
> each convolutional layer

# 1 3 Page 11 of 13  91 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

the application of sequence-aware training to more recent 

SNN detection architectures in order to determine the full 

potential of long event sequences while avoiding the com -

putational overhead of the full gradient. Such extensions 

should preserve the core motivation of sparse, stateful com -

putation while improving scalability and accuracy. 

Author Contributions  Katharina Bendig implemented and executed 

the  main  part  of  the  experiments,  contributing  significantly  to  the  ex -

perimental design and analysis. Katharina Bendig also took the lead 

in drafting the initial manuscript. René Schuster and Didier Stricker 

provided critical supervision and guidance throughout the develop -

ment  and  refinement  of  the  research  idea.  Their  expertise  and  insights 

greatly  influenced  the  conceptualisation  of  the  experiments  and  the 

interpretation of results. All authors actively engaged in thorough 

manuscript review and contributed substantially to its improvement. 

Their  collective  feedback,  revisions,  and  valuable  input  significantly 

enhanced the overall quality of the manuscript. 

Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 

DEAL. This work was funded by the Carl Zeiss Stiftung, Germany 

under the Sustainable Embedded AI project (P2021-02-009). 

Data Availability  All our experiments as well as the images in Fig.  3

are based on the Gen1 Automotive Detection Dataset, which is avail -

able for download from Prophesee at  h t  t p s  :  / / w  w w. p r o  p h e  s e e  .  a i / 2 0  2  0  / 

0 1  /  2  4  /  p  r  o  p  h  e  s  e  e  - g  e  n  1  - a  u  t  o  m  o  t  i  v  e  - d  e  t  e  c  t  i  o  n  - d  a  t  a  s  e  t  / .

Declarations 

Conflicts of Interest Statement  All authors certify that they have no 

affiliations  with  or  involvement  in  any  organization  or  entity  with  any 

financial  interest  or  non-financial  interest  in  the  subject  matter  or  ma -

terials discussed in this manuscript. 

Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 

Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap -

tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 

as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 

provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 

were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 

included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 

otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 

the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 

permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 

need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 

copy of this licence, visit  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

# References 

1.  Lichtsteiner P, Posch C, Delbruck T. A 128  × 128 120 dB 15  μs

Latency Asynchronous Temporal Contrast Vision Sensor. Journal 

of Solid-State Circuits. 2008. 

2.  Gallego G, Delbrück T, Orchard G, Bartolozzi C, Taba B, Censi 

A. Event-based vision: A survey. Transactions on Pattern Analy -

sis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI). 2022. 

3.  Gerstner W, Kistler WM. Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neu -

rons, Populations. Plasticity: Cambridge University Press; 2002. 

4.  Maass W. Networks of spiking neurons: The third generation of 

neural network models. Neural networks. 1997. 

> Table 4  Energy consumption of an ANN and a SNN
> Method  Network  F LOP s M ult  F LOP s Ac  Rl E (mJ ) EAN N
> EM ethod
> ANN  Backbone  2295.49 M  2298.21 M  − 10.56  1×
> Heads  351.32 M  351.32 M  − 1.61  1×
> Overall  2646.81 M  2649.53 M  − 12.17  1×
> SNN  Backbone  − 2298.21 M  0.0235  0.05  199 ×
> Heads  − 351.32 M  0.0960  0.05  31 ×
> Overall  − 2649.53 M  0.0296  0.10  116 ×

# 1 3 91  Page 12 of 13 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

5. Pfeiffer  M,  Pfeil  T.  Deep  learning  with  spiking  neurons:  Opportu -

nities and challenges. Frontiers in Neuroscience. 2018. 

6.  Indiveri G, Liu SC. Memory and information processing in neu -

romorphic systems. In: Proceedings of the IEEE. 2015. 

7.  Cordone L, Miramond B, Thierion P. Object detection with spik -

ing neural networks on automotive event data. In: International 

Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). 2022. 

8.  Maass W, Markram H. On the computational power of circuits 

of spiking neurons. Journal of Computer and System Sciences 

(JCSS). 2004. 

9.  Deng L, Wu Y, Hu X, Liang L, Ding Y, Li G. Rethinking the 

performance comparison between SNNS and ANNS. Neural Net -

works. 2019. 

10.  Wu Y, Deng L, Li G, Zhu J, Xie Y, Shi LP. Direct training for 

spiking neural networks: Faster, larger, better. In: AAAI Confer -

ence  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AAAI).  2019. 

11. Toyoizumi  T,  Jp  Pfister,  Aihara  K,  Gerstner  W.  Spike-timing 

dependent plasticity and mutual information maximization for a 

spiking neuron model. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro -

cessing Systems (NeurIPS). 2004. 

12. Rueckauer  B,  Lungu  IA,  Hu  Y,  Pfeiffer  M,  Liu  SC.  Conversion 

of  continuous-valued  deep  networks  to  efficient  event-driven  net -

works  for  image  classification.  Frontiers  in  Neuroscience.  2017. 

13.  Bendig K, Schuster R, Stricker D. On the future of training spik -

ing neural networks. In: International Conference on Pattern Rec -

ognition Applications and Methods (ICPRAM). 2023. 

14.  Neftci E, Mostafa H, Zenke F. Surrogate gradient learning in 

spiking neural networks: Bringing the power of gradient-based 

optimization to spiking neural networks. IEEE Signal Processing 

Magazine. 2019. 

15.  Zhao J, Cai JiS, Zeng Z, Wang Y, Y. Moving object detection and 

tracking by event frame from neuromorphic vision sensors. Bio -

mimetics. 2022. 

16.  Shair ZE, Rawashdeh SA. High-temporal-resolution object 

detection and tracking using images and events. Journal of Imag -

ing. 2022. 

17.  Mitrokhin A, Fermuller C, Parameshwara C, Aloimonos Y. 

Event-based moving object detection and tracking. In: Interna -

tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 

2018. 

18.  Cannici M, Ciccone M, Romanoni A, Matteucci M. Asynchro -

nous convolutional networks for object detection in neuromor -

phic cameras. In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition Workshops. CVPRW; 2019. 

19.  Perot E, de  Tournemire P, Nitti D, Masci J, Sironi A. Learning to 

detect objects with a 1 megapixel event camera. In: Neural Infor -

mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS); 2020. 

20.  Li J, Li J, Zhu L, Xiang X, Huang T, Tian Y. Asynchronous spa -

tio-temporal memory network for continuous event-based object 

detection. Transactions on Image Processing (TIP). 2022. 

21.  Li D, Tian Y, Li J. Sodformer: Streaming object detection with 

transformer using events and frames. Transactions on Pattern 

Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI). 2023. 

22.  Peng Y, Zhang Y, Xiong Z, Sun X, Wu F. Get: Group event trans -

former for event-based vision. In: International Conference on 

Computer Vision (ICCV). 2023. 

23.  Zubic N, Gehrig M, Scaramuzza D. State space models for event 

cameras. In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog -

nition (CVPR). 2024. 

24.  Gehrig M, Scaramuzza D. Recurrent vision transformers for 

object detection with event cameras. In: Conference on Computer 

Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2023. 

25.  Peng Y, Li H, Zhang Y, Sun X, Wu F. Scene adaptive sparse trans -

former for event-based object detection. In: Conference on Com -

puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024. 

26.  Yang N, Wang Y, Liu Z, Li M, Zhao AnY, Smamba X. Sparse 

mamba for event-based object detection. In: AAAI Conference 

on  Artificial  Intelligence.  2025. 

27.  Torbunov D, Ren Y, Ghose A, Dim O, Cui Y. Evrt-detr: Latent 

space adaptation of image detectors for event-based vision. In: 

International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2025. 

28.  Zhao Y, Lv W, Xu S, Wei J, Wang G, Dang Q. Detrs beat yolos 

on real-time object detection. In: Conference on Computer Vision 

and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024. 

29.  Su Q, Chou Y, Hu Y, Li J, Mei S, Zhang Z. Deep directly-trained 

spiking neural networks for object detection. In: International 

Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2023. 

30.  Fan Y, Zhang W, Liu C, Li M, Lu W. SFOD: Spiking fusion object 

detector. In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog -

nition (CVPR); 2024. 

31.  Bodden L, Schwaiger F, Ha DB, Kreuzberg L, Behnke S. Spik -

ing centerNet: A distillation-boosted spiking neural network for 

object detection. In: International Joint Conference on Neural 

Networks (IJCNN). 2024. 

32.  Yu L, et  al. SpikingViT: A multi-scale spiking vision transformer 

model for event-based object detection. Transactions on Cogni -

tive and Developmental Systems. 2024. 

33.  Zhang H, Li Y, Leng L, Che K, Liu Q, Guo Q, et  al. Automotive 

object detection via learning sparse events by spiking neurons. 

Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems. 2024. 

34.  Ahmed SH, Finkbeiner J, Neftci E. A hybrid SNN-ANN network 

for event-based object detection with spatial and temporal atten -

tion. 2024.  arXiv:2403.10173  arXiv preprint. 

35.  Xu Q, Deng J, Shen J, Chen B, Tang H, Pan G. Hybrid spiking 

vision transformer for object detection with event cameras. In: 

International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). 2025. 

36.  Luo X, Yao M, Chou Y, Xu B, Li G. Integer-valued training and 

spike-driven inference spiking neural network for high-perfor -

mance  and  energy-efficient  object  detection.  In:  European  Con -

ference on Computer Vision (ECCV). 2024. 

37.  Yuan M, Zhang C, Wang Z, Liu H, Pan G, Tang H. Trainable 

spiking-yolo for low-latency and high-performance object detec -

tion. Neural Networks. 2024. 

38.  Gao S, Tao Y, Gruel A, Saïghi S, Chang CH. Object detection 

with spiking neural networks on event videos for driving sce -

narios. Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems. 

2026. 

39.  Liu W, Anguelov D, Erhan D, Szegedy C, Reed S, Fu CY, et  al. 

SSD: Single shot multibox detector. In: European Conference on 

Computer Vision (ECCV); 2016. 

40.  Huang G, Liu Z, Maaten LVD, Weinberger KQ. Densely con -

nected convolutional networks. In: Conference on Computer 

Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR); 2017. 

41.  Fang W, Yu Z, Chen Y, Masquelier T, Huang T, Tian Y. Incorpo -

rating learnable membrane time constant to enhance learning of 

spiking neural networks. In: International Conference on Com -

puter Vision (ICCV). 2021. 

42.  Jacob B, Kligys S, Chen B, Zhu M, Tang M, Howard A. Quanti -

zation  and  training  of  neural  networks  for  efficient  integer-arith -

metic-only inference. In: Conference on Computer Vision and 

Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2018. 

43.  de  Tournemire P, Nitti D, Perot E, Migliore D, Sironi A. A Large 

Scale Event-based Detection Dataset for Automotive. 2020. 

arXiv:2001.08499 .

44.  Lin TY, Goyal P, Girshick R, He K, Dollar P. Focal loss for 

dense object detection. In: Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 

Machine Intelligence (T-PAMI). 2020. 

45.  Iacono M, Weber S, Glover A, Bartolozzi C. Towards event-driven 

object  detection  with  off-the-shelf  deep  learning.  In:  International 

Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2018. 1 3 Page 13 of 13  91 Cognitive Computation (2026) 18:91 

46.  Chen Nfy. Pseudo-labels for supervised learning on dynamic 

vision sensor data, applied to object detection under ego-motion. 

In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 

Workshops (CVPRW). 2018. 

47.  Redmon J, Farhadi A. YOLOv3: An incremental improvement. 

2018.  arXiv:1804.02767 .

48.  Jiang Z, Xia P, Huang K, Stechele W, Chen G, Bing Z. Mixed 

frame-/event-driven fast pedestrian detection. In: International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2019. 

49.  Ge Z, Liu S, Wang F, Li Z, Sun J. YOLOX: Exceeding YOLO 

series in 2021. 2021.  arXiv:2107.08430 .

50. Kim  Y,  Chough  J,  Panda  P.  Beyond  classification:  directly  train -

ing spiking neural networks for semantic segmentation. Neuro -

morphic Computing and Engineering (NCE). 2022. 

51.  Horowitz M. 1.1 Computing’s energy problem (and what we can 

do about it). In: International Solid-State Circuits Conference 

Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC); 2014. 

Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris -

dictional  claims  in  published  maps  and  institutional  affiliations.